Course Notes
2013
for McGill University
Course OCCH-612

Paul Héroux, PhD
paul.heroux@mcgill.ca
http://www.invitroplus.mcgill.ca/Ftp/Toxicology Course Notes 2013.pdf

© 2013, Paul Héroux.
This text can be freely copied, distributed and used for formal and informal educational purposes.

Determinants of Toxic Action
1 - REACHING VULNERABLE SITES
2 - TIME-COURSE OF DELIVERY
3 - DETOXIFICATION
4 - TOXICANT INTERACTIONS
5 - UNFOLDING OF TOXIC REACTIONS
Modeling Principles
1 - MODEL RELEVANCE
A - DESPECIATION
B- TOXICITY VARIABLES
C- TEST ENVIRONMENT

2 - LOW-DOSE EXTRAPOLATION
3 - LONG-TERM EXTRAPOLATION

Original version: October 1993.
Revised versions: 1994, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001,
2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010,
2012, 2013.

1. Scope of Toxicology
2. Risk Assessment
3. Targets and Bio-Transformation

Key to Assignment 1:  Solution: _
Key to Assignment 2:  Solution: _
Key to Assignment 3:  Solution: _

4. Toxicokinetics
5. Hemato- and Vascular Toxicity
6. Dermatotoxicity
7. Neurotoxicity
8. Hepatotoxicity
9. Nephrotoxicity
10. Techniques In Vivo & In Vitro
11. Pulmonary Toxicity
12. Reproductive Toxicity
13. Genotoxicity
14. Carcinogenicity.

1.1.7. Levels of Exposure . 18
1.1.7.1. High Exposures . 18
1.1.7.2. Low Exposures . 18
1.1.7.3. Ranging across Exposure Levels. 18
1.2. The Principles of Toxicology . 19
1.2.1. Determinants of Toxic Action . 19
1.2.2. Modeling principles . 21
1.2.2.1. Good Animal Models . 22
1.2.2.2. Poor Animal Models. 22
1.2.2.3. Inter-Species Barriers . 23
1.2.2.4. Difficulties of Low-Dose Extrapolation . 24
1.2.2.5. Improving the Models . 24
1.2.2.6. Accelerating the passage of Time . 25
1.2.2.7. Choices in Toxicology . 25
1.3. Dose and Time in Toxicity . 25
1.3.1. Haber’s Law. 26
1.3.2. Area under the Curve . 27
1.3.3. Threshold Limit Values . 27
1.3.4. Time Course of Toxic Reactions . 27
1.3.4.1. Toxidromes . 28
1.3.4.2. Cell Membrane Toxicity – Minutes . 28
1.3.4.3. Cell Metabolism Toxicity - Hours . 29
1.3.4.4. Cell Proliferation Toxicity - Days . 29
1.3.4.5. Cell Oncogenicity - Years. 30
1.4. Scope of Toxicological Data . 31
1.5. Toxicity Databases . 32
1.5.1. Availability of Toxicity Information . 32
1.5.2. Reliability of Toxicity Information . 34
1.5.3. Regulations on Toxicity Information . 35
1.5.4. Material Safety Data Sheets. 37
1.5.5. Poisoning Databases . 38
1.5.6. Hygiene and Research Databases . 39
1.6. Toxicologists in Society . 41

1.1. Toxicants .3
1.1.1. Identifying Intoxication.6
1.1.1.1. Toxic Exposure .6
1.1.1.2. Time-Course of Intoxication/Symptoms .6
1.1.1.3. Work History .6
1.1.1.4. Environment History .6
1.1.1.5. Forensics . 6
1.1.2. Identifying Toxicants .7
1.1.2.1. Structure-Activity Relationships.7
1.1.2.2. Toxicants and Evolution .7
1.1.2.3. Reaching the Target . 7
1.1.2.4. Scatter-graph of Drugs . 8
1.1.2.5. Antibiotics .8
1.1.3. Classifications of Toxicants . 8
1.1.3.1. Classification by Function . 8
1.1.3.1.1. Pesticides .9
1.1.3.1.2. Metals . 10
1.1.3.1.3. Organic Solvents . 13
1.1.3.1.4. Food . 13
1.1.3.2. Classification by Potency: Toxicity is in the
Dose . 13
1.1.4. Limiting the Consequences of Intoxication . 14
1.1.4.1. Eliminate the Toxicant from the Body . 14
1.1.4.2. Treatments or “Antidotes” . 15
1.1.5. Specificity of Toxicants . 15
1.1.5.1. Wide-Ranging Toxic Effects . 16
1.1.5.2. Specific Toxic Effects . 16
1.1.5.3. Bt-Toxin . 16
1.1.5.4. Side-Effects . 17
1.1.6. Definition of Dose . 17
1-2

1.
1.1. Toxicants
Toxicology studies the injurious effects of
chemical and physical agents (including
energy) on living organisms, observed as
alterations in structure and function.
The variety of injurious effects becomes
apparent if we examine the major causes of
death (F1.1). Many of these diseases are
caused or accelerated by exposure to toxic substances.
Toxicity data from various bio-medical sciences document the
effects of exposure to natural or artificial agents.
For more information on the history and scope of Toxicology,
the student is referred to Casarett and Doull's Toxicology. The
Basic Science of Poisons. 6th Edition, Curtis Klaassen,
McGraw Hill, 2001, pp. 3-10.


Hemlock (Conium maculatum)

Egg of the zebra longwing butterfly

Toxicant Control
For pharmaceuticals and pesticides, producers have the burden
of demonstrating safety to government. By contrast, for
industrial chemicals, government must prove that a chemical
poses a risk before it can restrict its production or use.
But companies have little incentive to develop information,
since this increases the likelihood that evidence of harm will be
uncovered. Changes are on the way, however:
Canada recently completed the Domestic Substances List
(DSL), mandated by law in 1999, which for the first time
examined information available on the roughly 23,000
previously unassessed chemicals that have been in
commerce in Canada over the last two decades, and
identified more than 4,300 warranting further scrutiny.
In the U.S., the voluntary High Production Volume (HPV)
Chemical Challenge compiles basic hazard information on
some 2,000 of the highest-volume chemicals in use.
In Europe, a system of Registration, Evaluation,
Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) was
adopted in December 2006. It requires producers and users
of 30,000 chemicals in commerce in Europe to register
them and to provide information on their production, use,
hazard and exposure potential. Chemicals of very high
concern will be allowed only by authorization.

to dispel the idea that natural is by definition healthy, consider the following.
 
many medicinal plants used by nearly 100 cultures on different continents
are related, testifying to their efficacy. In excess, such natural medicines
can involve risk.
 
The hemlock plant (at right) was the state method of execution in ancient
Greece, Socrates was one of its victims.
 
Honey bees gather pollen from a variety of natural flowers which may
contain toxins. From rhododendrons, one can get grayanotoxins, which
bind reversibly to cell membranes, allowing the passage of sodium and
leading to weakness, slow heartbeat, perspiration and nausea (the
symptoms of a heart attack).
 
Broccoli, considered a health food, contains methyl bromide, a
commercial fumigant and pesticide. When crushed, its tissue generates
isothiocyanates (toxic).
 
The zebra longwing butterflys gather toxicants ingested from plants they
eat, and produce eggs laced with cyanide and other toxins (the egg is
illustrated below).

1-3

Dealing with natural toxicants, such as plant extracts, is
different from dealing with a purified chemical. When
preparing potions based on plant sources, one has to take into
account the fact that the initial material may contain more or
less of the active agent, depending on season, growth
conditions or even time of day. This is why the pharmaceutical
industry generally looks for natural remedies to provide leads

particular by challenging metabolic pathways in very specific
and forceful ways.
Almost any substance can be a toxicant. A single atomic
species, such as metal exposure in industry (welding fumes),
can have toxic effects. A protein, such as the Clostridium
Botulinum toxin (F1.2), although much more complex, also has
very strong toxic properties.
Subtle Toxicity
In the liquid state, the O-H distance is 3 % shorter in
deuterium than in normal water, and heavy water freezes at
4°C, rather than 0°C. Although these differences appear
small, they are enough to underlie large toxicity
differences. Heavy water interferes with the mitotic
apparatus of higher organisms, including mammals, who
soon become ill and die at the point where about half their
body water has been replaced. Bacteria are only able to
grow slowly in pure heavy water.
Ionic pores are highly specific to metallic ions, but the
selectivity of the pores is insufficient to avoid the
substitution of lead for calcium, because both have similar
atomic size (180 pm, see F7.4). This is also true for
strontium, which has a slightly different size (200 pm), but
a very similar electronic structure. Small differences in the
properties of atoms have huge consequences for toxicity.
Sometimes, the same molecule can have both a toxic and a
benign character. Hemoglobin started its career in worms
as a binding agent to detoxify oxygen. It was ultimately
adopted by mammals in a slightly altered form for oxygen
transport. Even within mammals, it transports life-giving
oxygen to tissues, but will destroy the kidney’s glomerulus,
if liberated unchecked into the blood.

F1.1. Causes of Death involve many diverse diseases and body systems.

to useful molecules, as opposed to using the grown material
itself. Scientists in laboratories are equally concerned with
conducting studies using well defined agents. The supply of
uniform products is better served by synthesis laboratories than
agriculture. This has the consequence that most prepared drugs
are based on a few purified molecules, as opposed to complex
mixtures. This purity may have undesirable consequences, in
1-4

It seems, from these examples, as if toxicity occurs by
accident.

many cases. Mental or hemodynamic status may deteriorate
rapidly. Children are particularly susceptible.
Single-dose activated charcoal is the preferred gastrointestinal
tract decontamination, up to 1 hour after ingestion.
The severity of symptoms and toxicokinetics of the ingested
substance are considered in the disposition of an intoxicated
person. Observation time is based on toxicity, half-life and
amount ingested, particularly if signs or symptoms of toxicity
do not reverse during the observation period.

Not-so-Subtle Toxicity
By contrast, some toxic molecules seem entirely conceived for
nefarious goals. In the Botulinum toxin molecule of F1.2, Blue
is the toxic fragment which paralyzes the muscles, Green is the
pore opening the muscle’s membrane, Red-Yellow binds to
receptors on nerve cells, and if you look
closely, a green loop is designed to
mask the toxic part (Blue) from the
immune system.

Making Toxicity
The human body itself generates toxins , and may transform
molecules into more dangerous species by the process of bioactivation (see Chapter 8). Further, molecules in the body can
become toxins as a result of changes in folding conformation,
without any covalent chemical change. Such changes lead
protein to form aggregates, or to be misrouted within cells.
Examples of aggregation problems are found in diseases such
as Alzheimer’s, Creutzfeldt-Jakob and adult-onset diabetes for
protein1, and in Rett syndrome for chromatin20. Examples of
misrouting are cystic fibrosis, systemic amyloidosis,
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, cancer, and so on.
Pairs of molecules that are mirror images of each other can
have lethal limits that are 17-38 times that of the other
(pyrethroid insecticides).

F1.2. Molecular Structure of the Botulinum
toxin. Made of 1285 amino acids, 100
billionth of a gram is lethal through
interference with acetylcholine.

As well, some substances are extremely
hazardous when released accidentally as a result of chemical
spills, industrial explosions, fires, or accidents involving
railroad cars and trucks, or as a result of improper storage.
These chemicals have been studied specifically to design
emergency responses following releases.
Treating Acute Toxicity
Airway-breathing and circulation are always the most urgent
considerations in emergency situations, to correct hypoxia and
acidosis, and to maintain adequate circulation.
Documenting the intoxication is paramount.
Identification of electrolyte imbalances (renal function) and
liver impairment should be assessed using basic laboratory
studies (metabolic profile). Unless a specific antidote is
available, management is supportive (treating symptoms) in

Fighting Toxicity
Our fight against toxicants is on on-going story. Analysis of
samples collected in 2001 and 2002 by the CDC in the US
shows that within 2 years, hygiene effectively reduced body
burdens of lead (in children, a decline from 2.2 to 1.7 µg/dl),


A toxin is a metabolically produced toxicant. A toxoid is an altered form of a toxin,
possessing little or no toxic power, but capable of inducing antibodies.

1-5

second-hand smoke (blood cotinine declined by 70 %) and
mercury (an 18 % decline to 0.83 µg/dl for women of
childbearing age), while other agents such as benzo(a)pyrene
(found in a quarter of urine samples) and diisobutyl phthalate
(majority of people) are found to be more widespread than
expected26.

In liver cirrhosis, alcohol can cause infiltrations in liver tissue
over long periods of time. Nephrotoxic agents can induce very
slow loss of nephrons in the kidney.
1.1.1.3. Work History

 

Description of all previous jobs including short-term,
seasonal, and part-time employment and military service.
  Description of typical workday (job tasks, location,
materials, and agents used) and changes in routines or
processes.
  Jobs of household members.
“Are other employees or family members similarly affected?”

1.1.1. Identifying Intoxication
Many intoxications cause common diseases and diffuse, nonspecific symptoms. Exposure history is vital for correct
diagnosis, but primary care physicians include mention of the
patient's occupation in only 24 % of cases, and only 2 %
include information about (1) toxic exposure, (2) work history
and (3) environmental history.

1.1.1.4. Environment History

 

1.1.1.1. Toxic Exposure

Current and past exposures to chemicals (air pollution,
pesticide exposure, hazardous wastes/spill exposure, metals),
dust and fibers, fumes, biological hazards, radiation, noise,
and/or vibration should be documented. “Are family members
experiencing the same, or unusual symptoms?”

 
 
 
 

1.1.1.2. Time-Course of Intoxication/Symptoms

The time-course of symptoms is a major clue to uncovering
intoxication. Malaise can be periodic if the exposure is
rhythmic, as occurring during a work shift.
“Do your symptoms get either worse or better at work?” and
“Do your symptoms get either worse or better on weekends?”
In chronic intoxications, loss of appetite and weight are
common symptoms.
The muscle inhibition of curare is more obvious than the
nervous system hyperactivity connected with glutamate.
Generally, the slower the intoxication, the more difficult it is
to relate to a specific situation.

Present and previous home locations, recent
renovation/remodeling.
Home ventilation/moisture control, insulation, heating and
cooling systems.
Home cleaning agents.
Water supply.
Hobbies (e.g., painting, photography, sculpting, welding,
woodworking, piloting, restoring automobiles, shooting
firearms, creating stained glass, creating ceramics, and
gardening).
1.1.1.5. Forensics

To “home in” on a toxicant in the human body, blood can be
used to indicate body status at a given time, but biopsies from
heart, liver, kidney, lungs, brain, spleen, hair and nails are very
useful to gauge chronic intoxication.
Unless you know what to look for, a large number of tests may
be needed to finally detect a poison. But in acute cyanide
poisoning, the odor is usually quite apparent at autopsy. You
may perceive the bitter almond taste of cyanide if you crush 2
or 3 apple seeds between your teeth.
1-6

1.1.2.3. Reaching the Target

1.1.2. Identifying Toxicants

In the case of drugs, identification has traditionally been
largely a matter of trial and error. A similar problem exists in
the process of drug discovery, where a number of laboratories
race to find molecules with specific medicinal actions.
The Lipinsky11 rules predicting which molecules make good
drugs (to be taken by mouth) relate essentially to absorption of
the chemical, as opposed to its physiological action: molecules
that cannot reach their targets cannot be effective drugs.

It is often difficult to distinguish cause from effect in biology,
and this is particularly true in chronic toxicology. Symptoms
can be connected to organs, which can be connected to
histological changes, which may be connected to specific
agents.
An important problem is that the reaction of the body to a
toxicant may increase as a function of time because of bioaccumulation, or may attenuate because of physiological
adaptation (toxicodynamics).

T1.3. LIPINSKY RULES FOR DRUGS

1.1.2.1. Structure-Activity Relationships

1. Molecular weight less than 500.
2. Log of the Partition Coefficient less than 5.
3. Number of hydrogen bonds donors less than 5
(expressed as the sum of OHs and NHs).
4. Number of hydrogen bond acceptors less than 10
(expressed as the sum of Ns and Os).
5. No more than 5 fused rings.

The ability to predict from molecular structure alone which
molecules are toxic in the human body would be extremely
precious. Unfortunately, our knowledge is not so advanced.
Generally, real hints on toxicity purely from chemical structure
are slim. In the absence of test data, Structure-Activity
Relationship (SAR) analysis, which tries to predict a
chemical’s toxicity based on its chemical structure, is of
limited usefulness. Accuracy of SAR analysis varies
considerably depending on the particular chemical and on the
predicted characteristic. Unless some toxicity information is
already available on a specific molecule or on a closely related
molecular structure, we depend on experiments of various
kinds.

Large molecules generally have poor cell membrane
penetration (#1 and #5 above).
The Partition Coefficient of the molecule should not
be too high, otherwise the molecule will not be able to
cross fatty cell membranes and travel through body
fluids (#2 above).
Hydrogen bond donors and acceptors are known to
impair crossing of cell membranes (#3, #4 above).

1.1.2.2. Toxicants and Evolution

In evolutionary development, tremendous efforts have been
made to help animals identify toxicants. The largest gene
superfamily in vertebrates is that of the olfactory receptor
genes. In the mouse, 1,296 olfactory genes in 27 clusters have
already been identified13.


The Partition Coefficient is a ratio of the equilibrium concentrations of a dissolved
substance in a two-phase system made of two immiscible solvents (water and noctanol).

1-7

1.1.2.4. Scatter-graph of Drugs

and Functional group complexity, one does not see any
groupings (F1.4 left).
The random scatter in natural products is thought to reflect
unpredictability of physiological action, while the vertical
concentrations in the synthetic products (F1.4 right) are
thought to represent the practical preferences of synthesis
chemists12.

So, is it entirely impossible to predict biological action of a
chemical? One way to find out is to look at the chemical
properties of a group of chemicals that all have some action on
the body: drugs.
A basic way of describing drugs distinguishes molecular core
from functional groups.

1.1.2.5. Antibiotics

Core complexity counts all possible ring sizes, from largest
to smallest. This is a measure of the complexity of the
molecules’ basic core.
Functional group complexity compiles all the possible
ways of counting functional groups, from longest to
shortest. This is a measure of the complexity of the
molecules’ functional groups.

The pharmaceutical industry has invested large efforts into the
design of antibiotics (bacterial toxicants). Rather than focusing
on specific structural chemical species, the strategy has
generally been to address 4 major targets rather specific to
bacteria:
the cell wall, a structure found in bacteria, but not
animals (-lactam rings),
protein production,
DNA and RNA replication (bacteria divide very
rapidly), and
folate synthesis, a nutrient which donates one
carbon unit in various biosynthetic pathways.

In phenol, the core is benzene and the
functional group is OH. If one draws
diagrams (F1.4) positioning thousands of
natural and synthetic drugs using axes
representing Core complexity

In the future, as a result of the development of molecular
biology, drug identification may depend more on knowledge of
genes, proteins and biochemical pathways.
1.1.3. Classifications of Toxicants
1.1.3.1. Classification by Function

Toxicants that have similar effects or uses can be grouped
together, often reflecting applications. Frequently, compounds
that are chemically related are used for similar purposes and
form sub-groups within the general classifications.
F1.4. Scatter diagrams for natural and synthetic drugs.

1-8

Since bacteria are increasingly evading even the most potent front-line drugs,
as resistance continues to rise, there is a clear need for new antibiotics. But the
production of new drugs has slowed to a crawl since the 1940s and 1950s. In
the last 50 years, just one antibiotic of an entirely new class has made it into
clinical practice.
Looking for new antibiotics, some scientists turned to frog peptides, because
most of our infections occur across mucus membranes. Because a frog’s skin is
essentially a moist mucus membrane, it presumably need something to protect
it against pathogens. But despite decades of work, and thousands of candidate
compounds, not a single amphibian antimicrobial peptides has turned into a
marketable drug.
The compound that came closest to success (magainin), derived from the skin
of the African clawed frog—passed through Phase II clinical trials for patients
with diabetic foot ulcers, but the drug failed to get approval from the US FDA
in 1999. Large peptides make poor drugs: some get metabolized too readily,
while others trigger immune reactions. Their size also makes it difficult to
synthesize them in large enough quantities.

Organo-phosphates: parathion (shown, a pale
yellow liquid), diazinon, malathion. Inhibit
cholinesterase. Peripheral and CNS toxicity.
Degraded by the liver. Not usually persistent in
the environment.
Carbamates: aldicarb, carbaryl (shown), propoxur. Inhibit
cholinesterase. Peripheral and CNS toxicity.
Rapidly degraded.
Organochlorines: dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT,
shown). Change cell membrane ion permeability, leading to
altered firing rate. Readily stored in fat.
Metabolized at a rate of 1 % per day.
Bio-accumulates in the food chain.
Banned in 1972 in the US.
Pyrethrins: synthetic versions of the
pesticide pyrethrin occurring in the
flower chrysanthemum. Modified to
increase their stability in the
environment. Some synthetic
pyrethroids are toxic to the nervous
system.
Boric acid: (borax and boroncontaining salts): low-toxicity minerals with insecticidal,
fungicidal, and herbicidal properties. Do not evaporate or
volatilize into the air or pose the same health
concerns as synthetic pesticides. Slower acting
than the synthetic pesticides like diazinon or
pyrethrins, but highly effective over a long period
of time. As an insecticide, boric acid acts as a
stomach poison for ants, cockroaches, silverfish and termites,

1.1.3.1.1. Pesticides

Insecticides
F1.5. Application of parathion insecticide in India.

Most insecticides disrupt the nervous system.
Under the
same doses
by weight
as insects,
humans
show
similar
symptoms.
F1.6. Use of insecticides-pesticides
in the US (1997-2000).



Malathion is being phased out for many uses in Quebec in 2005. Methyl parathion
is now banned for use on most fruits and vegetables in the US because of effects on
the development of children's nervous system (see Chap. 7). It is used in lice
shampoos.

1-9

and as abrasive to the insect exoskeleton. As an herbicide,
boric acid causes desiccation or interrupts photosynthesis in
plants. Ingestion of boric acid leads to a dermal rash called
“boiled lobster syndrome”.

Dithiocarbamates: maneb (shown), zineb, mancozeb.
These three fungicides are metallo co-ordination
complexes with ethylenebis (dithiocarbamate), and
exist as polymers. The manganese and zinc
coordination complexes are known as maneb and
zineb, respectively. In use, also used as insecticide.

Herbicides
Mostly of low human toxicity, because of physiological
differences between humans and plants. Interfere with plant
hormones, inhibit photosynthesis, or promote water loss.
Bibyridyls: diquat (shown), paraquat. Desiccate
plants. Ingestion of concentrated paraquat
almost always leads to death due to lung failure
(see Chapter 11).
Chlorophenoxy compounds: 2,4-D (shown)
and 2,4,5-T. Agent Orange, a defoliant used in
the Vietnam war, was a 50-50 mixture of
above compounds. Promote uncontrolled growth, leading to
rapid plant death. Weakly toxic to humans, but a trace impurity
of 2,4,5-T is dioxin (a teratogenic, carcinogenic compound
causing chloracne).
Dinitrophenol: 2,4 dinitrophenol (DNP).
Inhibits ATP synthesis. Marketed as an antiobesity agent between 1935 and 1937.

Rodenticides
Most exposures are from accidents in industry, since they are
directly applied to palatable animal baits.
Anticoagulants: warfarin (shown).
Inhibits synthesis of vitamin K, leading to
elimination of prothrombin and absence of
clot formation. Animals bleed to death.
Inhibitors of cellular respiration:
derivatives of fluoroacetic acid. Block many enzymes in the
Krebs cycle, impeding ATP production.
Vasoconstrictors: norbormide (shown). Triggers
a vascular reaction specific to rodents, leading to
necrosis and death. Similar responses are not
seen in humans with doses 30 times larger.
Diabetogenics: pyriminil (shown). Blocks
nicotinamide metabolism, leading to death from
paralysis and respiratory arrest. Supposed to be
non-toxic to humans, but is
noted to destroy beta-cells of
the pancreas, leading to a
diabetic state. Peripheral
neuropathy and numerous Central Nervous System effects have
been noted. Antidote is nicotinamide.

Fungicides
Hexachlorobenzene (shown) and Organomercurials:
Are no longer marketed, but were used to treat
seed grain.
In various incidents, seed was mistaken for
grain in Turkey and Iraq, and was consumed by humans.
Phthalimides: use halted. Structure similar to thalidomide.

1.1.3.1.2. Metals

Many metals have variable oxidation numbers, which presents
an opportunity for physiological use (ex, transport of oxygen
by the iron of hemoglobin), but also for toxicity. They may



Quebec is banning 2,4-D on the basis of possible carcinogenicity and endocrine
and nervous system disturbances.

1-10

substitute one another (ex, lead for calcium) in terms of
chemistry or size (at cell membrane pores), but carry subtly
different characteristics that lead to toxicity. For example, lead
has a broader chemistry than calcium. Calcium prefers oxygen
ligands, while lead will also complex with the sulphydryl
group, and form complex ions with OH -, Cl-, NO3- and CO32-.
Metals also interfere in neurotransmission and energy
metabolism, stimulate reactions, interact with DNA and create
free radicals.
Fig. 1.6a. Worker mining salt in Lake
Katwe, Uganda. Any skin injury will
allow salt, Cu, Pb, Cd and Zn to enter
the body, preventing healing.

Metals may present in elemental,
inorganic or organic forms.
Some atomic forms of metals (in red in T1.7) are outright
toxicants, having no useful metabolic function:
Be, Ga, Cd, Hg, Tl, Pb, Bi, Ra, U.
Some metals (in green in T1.7) are essential to humans:
Na, Mg, K, Ca, Fe, Cu, Zn, Mo.
Others (in yellow-green in T1.7) are also essential, but are
toxic at high doses: V, Cr, Mn, Co, Ni.
Still others ( ) have important long-term toxicity:
Be, Cr, Mn, Ni, Cd, Hg, Pb.
While others ( ) are carcinogenic in animal tests:
Be, Cr, Co, Ni, Cd, Sb, Pb.

January 22, 2013: after 4 years of negotiations, more than 140 nations
signed the Minamata Convention, a treaty to reduce global mercury
emissions by 2020. But limits on the use of mercury in coal power
plants—one of the two main sources—won't go into effect for 5 to 10
years. Mercury is thought to impact the productivity of populations by
reducing their ability to learn.

In the 1600s, women in Europe used white lead face paint, and
mercury sulphide for rouge. The white lead made their hair fall
out, which explains the fashion for high foreheads, as hairlines
receded. Lead carbonate was used as a contraceptive in Rome
(topical application).
Bacteria will grow over pieces of solid lead. Lead “resistance”
in bacteria has been attributed to efflux pumps, P-type ATPases
that are known to also transport Pb2+, Cd2+ and Zn2+ across cell
membranes 19.

Molybdenum (atomic number 42) is the only second-row
transition metal that is required by most living organisms, and
the few species that do not require molybdenum use tungsten
(W), which lies immediately below molybdenum in the
periodic table10.
1-11

These ATPases are present in bacteria and mammalian
membranes, and handle cations such as calcium, sodiumpotassium and protons.
In the Middle Ages, syphilis was treated with mercury, which
was toxic to the bacterium (the spirochete Treponema
pallidum), but also to patients.
Later, potassium iodide was used. In the early 1900s, arsenic
compounds (C12H12N2As2O2) were introduced. But
occasionally, the liver would break down the organic arsenic
compound into elemental arsenic, which is toxic to the liver.
A protective measure to avoid this toxicity was to give patients
injections of vitamin C.
Criminals favor arsenic because it is tasteless
and odorless. Arsenic exploits cellular
pathways and binds to critical proteins.
Chronic administration produces weakness,
confusion and paralysis. Acute ingestion (a
few mg/kg) induces nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, low blood pressure and death.
In the early 1940s, penicillin replaced arsenic
as the treatment of choice for syphilis. Arsenic derivatives are
still used to treat African sleeping sickness and remains an
effective chemotherapy for acute forms of leukemia.
Metals are often eliminated through the kidneys, which become
targets themselves. Many metals are suspected of
carcinogenicity, although we do not understand the exact
mechanisms.

Metal
Cr

Co
Cu
Fe

Mn
Mo
Se



Inorganic arsenic is a carcinogen (arsenite ions probably cause extra blood vessels
to develop around tumors), while organic forms are less toxic, combat animal
diseases and accelerate growth.

1-12

T1.8. Essential Metals.
Function
Excess Produces
A common ingredient in
vitamin and mineral
Hexavalent chromium
supplements. Formation of
(+ 6) is a carcinogen
glucose tolerance factor and
(inhaled form).
for many enzyme reactions.
Polycythemia,
In vitamin B-12
Cardiomyopathy.
Synthesis of hemoglobin
Microcytic Anemia.
Liver and
Erythropoiesis
Cardiovascular damage.
(formation of RBCs)
If inhaled, Silicosis-like
symptoms.
Mn Superoxide Dismutase is
Manganese
an important protector of
Pneumonitis,
mitochondria.
CNS disorders.
Aldehyde oxidase, Sulfite
Anemia and Diarrhea
oxidase and Zanthine oxidase.
(animal studies).
Neuropathies,
Glutathione peroxidases
Dermatopathies,
neutralize hydrogen peroxide
Decreased Fertility,
from metabolism.
Teratogenesis.

1.1.3.1.4. Food

1.1.3.1.3. Organic Solvents

Food can be toxic (mushrooms, rhubarb leaves), and more
chemicals are released when food is cooked. Cooking kills
micro-organisms that could make preserved food, in particular,
toxic (botulism), and it also makes many foods more palatable.
Since it helps breakdown cell membranes, it makes foods more
digestible and more easily absorbed.
More than a thousand low molecular weight compounds are
produced when food is heated, mostly at ppm levels, but the
toxicity of these chemicals has not been established.
For example, a cola drink uses caramel color produced by
heating sugar and ammonia, and contains 138 µg of 4Methylimidazole, 4.8 times greater than California’s 29 µgper-day limit, computing to a lifetime risk of cancer of 5 out of
100,000 people.

Organic solvents are widely used in industry and fall into a
number of classes.
Aliphatic Hydrocarbons: methane, ethane, propane, butane,
pentane, hexane, heptane, octane, ethylene, propylene,
butadiene, and isoprene.
Aromatic Hydrocarbons: benzene, toluene, styrene,
ethylbenzene, xylene and naphthalene.
Halogenated Hydrocarbons: methyl chloride, methylene
chloride, ethyl chloride, chloroform, methyl chloroform,
bromoform, carbon tetrachloride and vinyl chloride.
Esters: acetate, ethyl silicate, ethyl formate, and methyl
formate.
Ketones: methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone, and
diisobutyl ketone.
Ethers: methyl ether, isopropyl ether, chloromethyl ether, and
chloromethyl methyl ether.
Alcohols: methanol, ethanol, propanol, isopropanol,
isobutanol, amyl alcohols, and allyl alcohols.
Aldehydes: acrolein, acetaldehyde, formaldehyde, furfural, and
chloral hydrate.
Amines: methylamine, dimethylamine, trimethylamine,
ethylamine, diethylamine, triethylamine, propylamine,
butylamine, allylamine and cyclohexylamine.

Other potentially carcinogenic chemicals that have raised
concerns in the past include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
N-nitrosamines, aromatic amines and acrylamide.
However, there is no practical way to remove these chemicals
from cooked or processed foods, and also there is not enough
evidence that they present health risk to humans. In each case,
after some time passes, public attention fades away, as (1) we
must eat something, (2) we have been cooking for a long time
(500,000 years), and (3) the risk is difficult to avoid.
1.1.3.2. Classification by Potency: Toxicity is in the
Dose

Organic solvents, because of their solubility in cell membranes,
often depress the Central Nervous System and irritate tissues
and membranes. Many are anesthetics, penetrating well into
nervous and fatty tissues. They are frequently nephro- hepatoand cardio-toxic.



Toxicants have effects that depend on the
amount administered. As Paracelsus said,
the dose makes the poison. 20 drinks of
vodka, taken rapidly on an empty stomach,
could kill you.

a hydrocarbon radical, C5H11.
CH2=CH-CH2-

Toxicants have multiple effects. So, to
1-13

obtain a coherent toxicity classification, it is necessary to
agree on the final outcome by which toxicity will be judged.
The single Lethal Dose that kills 50 % of animals (LD50) has
historically been the landmark for the purposes of
classification.
Although the determination of LD50 implies the death of
animals (unethical), it should be considered that almost any
chemical manufactured will inevitably intoxicate some human
at some time. When this occurs, knowledge of the LD50 allows
immediate evaluation of the gravity of the intoxication, a
considerable advantage in clinical treatment.
Thus, toxicants can be classified according to their potency, the
weight that will produce a given response per animal body
weight, otherwise known as the specific dose (T1.9).
LD50 generally refers to death of an animal, but it could also
refer to death of a cell. For example, a single
molecule of ricin (shown, from castor seeds,
LD50 = 2µg/kg) reaching the cytosol has
been reported to kill a HeLa cell as a result
of protein synthesis inhibition. Ricin causes
lethal damage to the gut if ingested, and to
the lungs if inhaled. A vaccine has been
developed against this toxicant (antibodies
can neutralize it).
A whole class of bacterial secretions, the
bacteriocins, are lethal at a dose of a single molecule per cell.
Interestingly, the producers of bacteriocins also synthesize a
second protein that pairs up with the antibiotic, keeping it
inactive until it reaches its target.

T1.9 Potency Rating Chart using acute LD50s.
LD50 is the dosage (mg/kg body weight) causing death in 50 % of
exposed animals.

1.1.4. Limiting the Consequences of
Intoxication
Intoxication is dealt with by
(1) removal of the toxicant,
(2) elimination of the toxicant from the body,
(3) treatment with an antidote, antagonist, metabolic
modulator or substrate, and
(4) allowing the body’s own regenerative powers to take over.
1.1.4.1. Eliminate the Toxicant from the Body

Once absorbed into the body, can toxicants be taken out?
If the skin has been exposed, it can be washed. The lung can
take in toxicants, but it can also exhale them.

1-14

Emesis, the regurgitation of a poison taken via the oral route,
can be induced by syrup of ipecac, but this must be done within
tens of minutes to be effective.
If an ingested poison cannot be vomited, perhaps it can be
bound within the enterum using a high performance absorber
such as carbon black, which provides a binding tight enough
that the toxicant is chaperoned out of the body in the feces.
Typically, charcoal given at 10 g of charcoal per gram of
toxicant will absorb 50 % of a poison, even 1 hour after
ingestion. The list of toxicants that are bound by carbon black
include: cyanide, malathion, parathion, diazinon, dichlorvos,
DDT, carbamates, mercuric chloride, methanol, N-methyl
carbamate, ethylene glycol, kerosene, turpentine, isopropyl
alcohol and tolbutamide. It does not bind lithium and
potassium, iron or lead.
If the toxicant has escaped from the digestive system into the
blood, perhaps injection of a chelator, able to specifically bind
the toxic agent in the blood and help carry it out of the body, is
possible. For example, injections of the chelator ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA, shown) have been the
method of choice for the treatment of lead intoxication.

For many chemicals, the slow process of clinical recovery is
closely related to elimination of the agent from the body, often
monitored using blood plasma levels (Chapter 4,
Toxicokinetics).
But some injuries cannot be cured by elimination of the
toxicant. In burns, for example, the injurious agent dissipates
completely following injury, but leaves behind manifestations
such as edema, intravascular coagulation, small vessel
thrombosis and ischemia, all this in the absence of the agent
itself. This underscores that the agent itself and its effects can
have different half-lives. More will be said on the elimination
of toxicants in Chapters 4 and 8.
There are basically two types of biological monitoring in toxic
reactions: following the evolution of the toxicant concentration
over time, and assessing the evolution of various aspects of the
toxic injury. These two aspects are often linked.
1.1.4.2. Treatments or “Antidotes”

Some toxicants act by inhibiting or over-stimulating the
nervous system. In this case, if appropriate chemicals can be
ingested or injected, the effect of the toxicant may be
compensated or at least blocked long enough for the toxicant to
be naturally eliminated. As well, some toxicants target
molecular steps in metabolism: inhibition of enzymes,
depletion of vital substrates, de-activation of critical molecular
species. Occasionally, there are effective answers to such
intoxications that can reverse the toxic effects. A number of
examples are presented in Table 1.10.

In most cases, toxicants bound by chelators can be excreted
from the body via the natural routes, mostly the liver and
kidneys.

1.1.5. Specificity of Toxicants
As a rule, simpler toxicants are likely to have more widespread
effects among species and body systems.

1-15

T1.10. TOXICANTS and…

small quantities. The careless human handler can
experience life-threatening consequences if given sufficient
dose, just as the insect: here again, the toxic effects are
relatively non species specific.

ANTIDOTES
BY SPECIFIC BINDING TO THE TOXICANT

Botulism
Scorpion, spider, rattlesnake

Botulinum antitoxin
Specific Antivenins
BY GENERAL BINDING TO THE TOXICANT
(CHELATION)

Arsenic and mercury
Iron
Lead

Other toxicants depend on particularities of tissues or species,
and are species-specific. Protein toxicants are more likely to be
specific.

Dimercaprol, D-penicillamine
Deferoxamine
Calcium ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)
BY BUFFERING OR NEUTRALIZATION

Chlorine gas
Heparin

1.1.5.2. Specific Toxic Effects

Nebulized sodium bicarbonate
Protamine

Aspirin can kill cats and acetaminophen snakes, while
guinea pigs can consume strychnine, which is very
poisonous to humans.
Diclofenac was used to treat swelling and pain in cattle in
India. As the drug became popular, the population of
vultures decreased by 95 %, as the vultures eating cattle
carcasses died of kidney failure24. Diclofenac is being
replaced by another non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug,
meloxicam.
Allelopathic plants such as the black walnut, sycamore and
sassafras trees release substances in the environment
through their roots, leaves or by evaporation that limit the
germination of competitors.
The toxicant specificity can involve very recognizable
mechanisms: the spotted knapweed of the American west
secretes catechin, which in tiny amounts induces apoptosis
in other plants.

BY COUNTER-ACTING EFFECTS ON CELLS
(ANTAGONISTS)

Organophosphates and carbamates
Opiates
Dioxin
Benzodiazepines

Atropine
Naloxone, nalmefene (opiod antagonist)
Epigallocatechin gallate (green tea leaves)
Flumazenil
BY MODULATION OF METABOLISM

Acetaminophen
Methanol
Methemoglobin-forming agents
Methotrexate
Isoniazid, monomethylhydrazine
Anticholinergics
Warfarin anticoagulants
Ethylene glycol
Ethanol
Hypoglycemic agents and insulin

N-Acetylcysteine (increases glutathione)
Ethanol (slows metabolism of methanol)
Methylene blue (reactivation of Hemoglobin)
Folate (vitamin B9, rebuild folate levels), leucovorin
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6, rebuilds GABA levels)
Physostigmine (cholinesterase inhibitor)
Vitamin K (restores levels depleted by warfarin)
Ethanol (slows metabolism of ethylene glycol)
Thiamine (vitamin B1, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome)
Dextrose (restores blood sugar)
BY CREATION OF AN EXCRETION ROUTE

Cyanide
Hydrogen sulfide

Amyl nitrite, sodium nitrite, thiosulfate
Sodium nitrite, thiosulfate

1.1.5.1. Wide-Ranging Toxic Effects

For example, for embalming bodies, it is necessary to kill
or halt the progress of a wide range of microorganisms. For
some time, arsenic trioxide was used for this purpose, until
it was replaced by formaldehyde (5-35 %), glutaraldehyde,
methanol or ethanol (9-56 %).
Insects are vulnerable to many of the traditional pesticides
because most of their bodies or food supplies are being
sprayed, while humans are hopefully exposed to relatively

1.1.5.3. Bt-Toxin

Ideal pesticides would affect only a target species (the pest)
while leaving the human handlers unharmed. Recently, a
controversy erupted concerning the Bt-toxin from Monsanto, a
molecule specifically lethal to corn borer caterpillars by
perforating their gut. Derived from the bacterium Bacillus

1-16

thuringiensis, it was bio-engineered into a corn seed that makes
its own pesticide (F1.11). An unexpected toxicity was
discovered: in sufficient quantities, pollen from Bt-plants also
kills larvae of monarch butterflies.
Most toxicants are also tissue specific, presenting more risk to
certain organs than to others. Lead stored in bone, and organic
solvents stored in fat do not cause functional damage, but both
can seriously affect the nervous system, if they reach it.

In the case of drugs that need to be metabolized to be active,
the patient may get no benefit if metabolism is too slow.
Conversely, if metabolism is too fast, the patient overdoses.
1.1.6. Definition of Dose
Toxicologists assume that detection of adverse biological
effects in animal models increases the chance that the same
effects occur in humans. But do the effects start at the same
threshold dose?
Although the most common way of specifying dose is weight
of substance per weight of living subject (for example, mg/kg),
this metric is not necessarily the most useful.

F1.11. Structure of Bt-toxin.
A monarch caterpillar dines on a
milkweed dusted with corn
pollen.

In 1883, Max Rubner pointed out that between animals of
different size, mass increases according to Length3 (or Mass1),
while surface increases according to Length2 (or Mass2/3).
1.1.5.4. Side-Effects

Under the assumption of complete and uniform penetration of
toxicants in a passive body, if one wished to obtain a constant
toxicant concentration at the action sites, dose should be
proportional to Mass to the first power (Mass1).

The problem of agent specificity is also important in
pharmaceuticals, where “side-effects” are common. Some sideeffects such as rashes, fever, fatigue and nausea are mild, but
some, like internal bleeding, reduction in white blood cell
numbers and abnormal heart rhythms, are serious and can
result in hospitalization and death.
Class “A” side effects are an exaggerated therapeutic
response.
Type “B” side effects are unpredictable from known
pharmacology.
Type “C” side effects affect something else than the
intended target and are often caused by a metabolite of the
drug.
About 60 % of drugs known to trigger adverse reactions do so
because the patient metabolizes them too slowly, lengthening
the effective time of exposure.

Imagine now the dynamic absorption of the toxicant through
the body. The concentration at the action site will be primarily
determined by transfer across body membranes, for example
the inside of the lungs, digestive system, or the inside surface
of the vascular system. This surface transfer scales according to
surface or Mass2/3.
In 1932, Max Kleiber looked at a broad range of data from
many animal models and found experimentally that metabolic
rate was related to Mass3/4. The value of 3/4 falls between 1
and 2/3, and this range is probably appropriate for the bulk of
toxic reactions.
1-17

1.1.7. Levels of Exposure

Therefore, both geometry and metabolism seem to point to the
importance of maximum local concentrations as opposed to
long-term bulk averages in determining toxicity.

1.1.7.1. High Exposures

Victims of accidental or suicidal poisonings, occupationally
exposed workers, bystanders (workers nearby, those living
close to an industrial facility emitting toxic agents) and the
general public typically have different exposures to a particular
agent, as shown in F1.14.

Refinements are possible in the definition of dose. Since the
molecular weight of the toxicant is not a factor in the
expression of toxicity, perhaps an even better metric would be
the number of moles of toxicant (= a number of molecules) per
mass of animal to the power 0.75.
Other scaling relations have been observed. An animal’s
lifespan scales as Mass1/4. Heart rates scale as Mass-1/4 (F1.14).

It is easiest to document toxic effects at the highest doses,
where symptoms of toxicity are easily and rapidly detected.
If no discernible adverse health effects can be detected acutely
(within a day) at high exposures, it is conveniently assumed
that no life-threatening effects will be observed at lower levels
over short periods.

However, the widespread practice is to use a simple metric of
mg/kg for dosage. It is simple, and toxicologists feel they have
other more substantial inaccuracies to deal with in the conduct
of their tests.

1.1.7.2. Low Exposures

Significant low-exposure impacts of pesticides, for example,
are being discovered regularly. At a concentration of 15 ppb in
the Sierra Nevada, the pesticide endosulfan, widely used and
drifting from California, killed a number of frog species. In
some frog species, the LD50 is only 0.3 ppb25.
1.1.7.3. Ranging across Exposure Levels

Documenting acute effects, such as the Lethal Dose to 50 %
of animals (LD50) is the first step is assessing safety. This
value is know for a wide range of chemicals, in part because
experiments are not too expensive.
Although LD50 levels are very important in guiding dosage for
progressively longer tests to be performed subsequently at
lower levels, toxicologists are most concerned with identifying
toxic reactions that occur at the smallest exposures (Lowest
Observed Adverse Effect Level or LOAEL), because of the
importance these levels have on ultimately determining safe
limits over long periods of time in human populations.

F1.12. Ranges of chronic toxic exposures in human populations.
General Population, Bystander, Occupational, and Poisonous exposures
cover broad ranges, with overlaps.

1-18

1.2. The Principles of Toxicology

Hormesis

1.2.1. Determinants of Toxic Action

A 19th century view by Arndt is that weak stimuli slightly
accelerate vital activity, middle-strong stimuli raise it, strong
ones suppress it and very strong ones halt it. Schultz published
at that time many examples of yeast growth stimulation by
subtoxic concentrations of various poisons (iodine, bromine,
arsenious acid). The Arndt-Schultz law says that every stimulus
on a living cell produces an activity inversely proportional
(within limits) to the intensity of the stimulus5. This
modulation with dose of the vital reaction is the inverse of the
conventional dose response.

The basic principles of Toxicology attempt to give a theoretical
framework for the understanding of toxic reactions, essentially
defining the factors that will influence the development of
toxicity.
1 - TOXICANT REACHING THE VULNERABLE SITE
Molecular size, hydrophobicity-hydrophylicity and ionization
of the toxicant mostly determine repartition within body
compartments. The toxicant exerts detectable effects if it
reaches these body compartments.

Certainly, low doses of toxicants awaken responses in the
immune system. A single dose of an antitumoral
immunosuppressive substance (cisplatin) is able to induce
increased lymphokine-activated killer activity6, and low doses
of cytostatic agents stimulate human granulocytes and
lymphocytes growth7. Southam and Erlich8, who reported the
stimulatory effect of an antifungal when used at low doses,
proposed the term "hormesis", defined as the stimulatory effect
of sub-inhibitory concentrations of toxic substances. Stebbing9
developed the concept with other scientists.
Hormesis, a non-specific phenomenon increasing the resistance
and growth of all living organisms, may be frequent in
pharmacology and toxicology. Hormesis relating to a number
of endpoints, such as growth, learning, reproduction, birth
defects and cancer is seen in organisms from bacteria to
humans, caused by a variety of chemicals, including lead,
cadmium, mercury and dioxin. Many stimulants are toxic at
high doses.

2 - TIME-COURSE OF TOXICANT DELIVERY
Whether the same amount of a toxicant is administered as a
single bolus, or spread over decades, will influence strongly the
type and intensity of the toxic reaction. How the body handles
the toxicant by mechanisms of elimination is the subject of
Toxicokinetics1.
3 - ACTIVATION OF DETOXIFICATION MECHANISMS
Living systems are adaptive, and deal with weak toxic
exposures by maintaining homeostasis. Therefore, weak toxic
exposures can be accompanied by a tissue reaction to
intoxication for a certain period of time. These changes may be
related to stress protein responses, DNA and cell repair
mechanisms, and apoptosis (culling of marginal cells).

1

Toxicokinetics is the mathematical description of the elimination of toxicants.

1-19

Adaptation to Toxicants
This "action-reaction" mode of hormesis, coupled with the
synthesis of specific defense molecules in reaction to mild
intoxication, may explain why sub-lethal doses of toxicants
trigger adaptive responses which maximize the innate
poisoning resistance of living organisms30. When a strong
challenge is subsequently applied, the toxic reaction is
attenuated. Mithridate and Raspoutin are celebrated users of
this technique.
This response, because it includes time for adaptation, is likely
different from hormesis, but is similarly effective against toxic
effects. Some believe that low doses of synthetic and natural
chemicals are actually beneficial, and reduce cancer rates by
potentiating defense responses.
In other cases, low doses may lead to a subtle tolerance that is
unwanted. It is believed that the repeated mild exposures to
drugs that anesthesiologists are subjected to while performing
their functions (they are frequently in the breathing zone of
patients, where intravenously administered drugs are exhaled
by the lungs) may make them more vulnerable to developing
drug abuse problems23.

F1.13. Protective response at low doses (hormesis) can be illustrated
either as an increase in cell viability (left) or a decrease in tumor
incidence (right). Calabrese and Baldwin, 2001.

The existence of hormesis raises questions29 about
(1) the use of high-doses in tests to predict what happens at
low-doses, specifically about using the maximumtolerated-dose in testing for carcinogenesis,
(2) the use of certain chemotherapeutic drugs. The decay of
a drug’s concentration over time may produce a long
tail at a concentration that stimulates the proliferation of
the surviving cells. The tumor eradication potential of
the drug may be partly attenuated by proliferation
stimulation.

Tachyphylaxis designates a rapid decrease in the response to a
drug after repeated doses over a short period of time. General
explanations for the phenomenon: depletion of intermediates
creating the drug's effect, or depletion of the drug’s receptors in
response to their saturation. The best known examples are from
street drugs such as amphetamines, ecstasy and ephedrine.

Action of Caffeine vs Dose
Caffeine has never been strictly approved as a pesticide, but it can be used as a 2
% solution to kill frogs. Caffeine consumption in pregnant women should be
limited, to protect developing brains.

Stimulation (+)
Two cups of coffee, blood caffeine level of 1-10 µg/ml.
Seizures (-)
Have been reported at 50 µg/ml.
Death (- -)
Reported as low as 80 µg/ml.



King of Pontus, enemy of Rome, nibbled a mix of 54 ingredients to protect himself
against poisoning. When he actually attempted to poison himself, as the Romans
were closing in, he failed, and had to die by the sword.

1-20

A tempting view is that all intoxications are basically nonthreshold, but that thresholds are observed experimentally
because of lumped reactions that include detoxification
mechanisms and hormesis together that add their contributions
to the non-threshold curve.

Toxic reactions will develop and repair at different rates,
depending on whether the lesion is metabolic, structural,
genetic or heritable.
Short time-frame: metabolic poisons such as cyanide.
Long time-frame: liver inclusions of fat and fibroblasts from
exposure to alcohol.
Very long time-frame: genetic changes in the soma (cancer of
individual) and in the reproductive cells (changes in the
offspring).

4 - TOXICANT INTERACTIONS
Multiple toxicants in combination may have effects
unpredictable from their individual actions. Primarily because
of interactions documented in the liver (cytochrome enzymes),
it is known that two toxicants can have combined toxic effects
that add
synergistically (more than the sum),
linearly (the sum) or
antagonistically (less than the sum).
For example, administration of ethanol is used to attenuate
ethylene glycol (anti-freeze) toxicity. Toxicants that act by
generating free radicals or causing cancer, such as dioxins,
furans and PCBs are generally assumed to have additive risks,
although it is relatively rare that solid data is available to
confirm the assumption21.

Toxicities can cumulate over time, as a consequence of the
time-course of toxicant delivery (Principle 2), or attenuate over
time, as a consequence the activation of detoxification
mechanisms (Principle 3).
Cumulation: heritable genetic damages from ionizing
radiation.
Attenuation: increased number of detoxification pumps in the
membrane of cells to enhance elimination of low levels of
toxicants.
1.2.2. Modeling principles

5 - TIME-COURSE OF TOXIC REACTIONS
Toxicodynamics investigates the changes over time in the
physiology and structure of an organism as a result of toxicant
exposure.

For reasons of ethics and cost, toxicology is heavily dependant
on models in securing toxicity data. While maintaining the
representativity of the test, the toxicologist seeks:
to use a lower species or test system,
to obtain results faster, and at lower cost.

Positive toxicodynamic change: the rise in the level of CYP
enzymes in liver cells, to allow faster clearance of a toxicant.
Negative toxicodynamic change: elimination of healthy cells
from tissue as a result of necrosis or apoptosis.
Positive or negative toxicodynamic change: up- or downregulation in the nervous system.

1-21

1 – FIND A RELEVANT MODEL
The intent of toxicology studies is often to determine Safe
Human Doses such that no adverse effect occurs in human
subjects.
Because of limits in our knowledge, it is not possible to
reliably create toxicological models that exactly determine
human toxic thresholds, and the corresponding safe toxicant
exposures.
The next best strategy is to use toxicological representations
that acknowledge less precision, but that include Safety Factors
to compensate for our ignorance. The following factors
contribute to the imprecision of toxicological models.

nutrient supply networks. These simple views do not account
for the shared evolutionary history of some species, who may
share metabolic characteristics. b differs among lineages,
ranging mostly between 0.67 and 0.75, and there may be no
universal relationship between mammalian BMR and M.28
1.2.2.1. Good Animal Models

Animal models may need only small adjustments to
compensate for inter-species variations. For example,
(1) the hematopoietic toxicity observed following
exposure to benzene. The mechanism is the same
in most mammalian species, but some models are
more sensitive than others,
(2) some of the neuropathic conditions in humans attributed to
pesticides and solvents are faithfully reproduced in certain
animal species. The adult chicken is a good model for
neuropathy from some
organophosphorus ester
insecticides and
hexacarbon.

A- DESPECIATION
Species have enough similarities between them to make animal
or cellular models from many species acceptable, but it is
difficult to certify that the system chosen is appropriate for the
determination of a particular toxic threshold.
Anatomical, micro-anatomical and molecular-genetic
similarities must be considered in the choice of appropriate
models for toxicity testing. Selected test species should ideally
display the same natural diseases, syndromes or toxicities as
humans. Models of tissue cultures, cell cultures, or even
biochemical mixtures can meaningfully represent complete
living systems only if they are chosen wisely based on previous
physiological knowledge. Most of the differences are
quantitative, but in a game of toxic thresholds, these
quantitative differences can be important.
Specific variables among a broad range of mammals have been
studied. Basal metabolic rate (BMR) dependance on body mass
(M) in mammals is generally expressed as BMR = aMb, but the
value of b is uncertain. Surface area–to–volume ratio argues for
geometric scaling (b = 0.67), while others claim a quarterpower scaling (b = 0.75) supported by theoretical analyses of

F1.14. Among animals,
heart rate tracks weight
with a 0.25 power law. A
dog about 1/16th of the
weight of a horse has a
pulse twice as fast.
1.2.2.2. Poor Animal Models

Some animals models may be inappropriate because they lack
the biochemical machinery that makes another species
vulnerable (such as the lack of thyroid binding protein in
rodents versus humans, see Chapter 10).

1-22

1.2.2.3. Inter-Species Barriers

chronic ones? Does the test display effects on the most
sensitive target within the organism? Most tests can find a
connection between an exposure and an effect, but is this effect
appropriate to determine the acceptable human exposure
levels? In the absence of complete knowledge, many
toxicologists believe that a safety factor of 10 is appropriate to
cover this uncertainty.

About 60 % of infectious diseases are shared between humans
and animals (zoonosis), a testimony to similarities between
them: bird flu, SARS, HIV, Ebola, bubonic plague, yellow
fever, monkey pox, bovine tuberculosis, Lyme disease, West
Nile fever, Marburg, strains of influenza, rabies, Hantavirus
pulmonary syndrome and Nipah. Most (in bold) are due to
viruses. Smallpox does not have an animal reservoir, and this is
why it could be eradicated.
Inter-Species barriers prevented migration of scrapie-like
diseases to humans from sheep, but bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE) did migrate somewhat to mink and
humans.These barriers manifest subtle differences between
models that look superficially equivalent.
Species variations problems may be overcome by testing in
numerous animal species, or by an appropriately chosen single
model.
However, the consensus appears to point to an unavoidable
imprecision in substituting a model for the real thing, this
imprecision being set as a safety factor of 10 in human toxic
threshold determinations.

C- CHOOSE APPROPRIATE TEST ENVIRONMENT
Once we have selected the proper species for representation of
the human toxic threshold, and have decided on the variables to
represent such an effect, how do we know that the
circumstances under which the tests will be conducted will
result in a safe human dose that will guarantee safety?
Would you have predicted that in some animal models (but
not in others) the baseline incidence of liver tumors can
increase solely as a result of animals being fed a cholinemethionine deficient diet?
Do we know that, within a given species, we have chosen
the most appropriate strain, subspecies or genetic variant for
this toxic threshold determination? Could our determination be
influenced by age, sex, route of entry, the test’s environmental
parameters or the culture medium in the case of in vitro tests?
In the absence of complete knowledge, many toxicologists
believe that a safety factor of 10 is appropriate to cover this
uncertainty.
It has not escaped your attention that all of these limitations of
models (safety factors of 10) can weight heavily in the
direction of reducing safe human doses to very small values,
potentially making them difficult to implement in practice.

B- CHOOSE RELEVANT VARIABLES
There are innumerable end-points that can potentially be
chosen to quantify toxicity, and finally to determine toxic
thresholds (smallest adverse effect level). They range from
death of a subject (this would be used with extrapolation to
lower doses) to, say, increases in the concentration of ornithine
decarboxylase enzyme in cultured cells.
How can we be sure that the toxicity variables we have
retained are appropriate to quantify the human toxic threshold,
and that, for that matter, our choice of variables was wise in the
context of all possible human adverse effects, especially the
1-23

1.2.2.5. Improving the Models

2 - LOW-DOSE EXTRAPOLATION
Toxicology is in a hurry to get results. Low exposures in
humans are often simulated by high doses in an animal model,
under the assumption that high doses in animals will produce
the same toxic reaction as observed at low doses in humans,
but with more statistical strength (binding isotherm view, see
Chapter 2).
To reduce the number of animals necessary for a test, while
still obtaining robust data, extrapolation from high to low doses
is frequently used.
The reliability of toxicity testing therefore often depends on a
monotonous relation between the log-of-dose of the agent and
the toxic outcome. Although this assumption is almost
universally used, there is substantial evidence that there are
significant departures from it, as elevating exposure changes
the diseases expressed in a model from the chronic class to the
acute class.

If exposure must remain low in the model to conserve
mechanisms, can the model itself become more sensitive to
reduce testing costs?
Toxicity amplification, other than by increasing dose, may be
possible.
For example, by reducing the reserve of detoxification
molecules and antioxidants. But it is not clear that the
effects are equivalent to increasing dose with none of
the disadvantages.
In animals, we can enhance the sensitivity to chronic
diseases by genetic knockout techniques (Chapter 10).
This approach may be meaningful for genetic
mechanisms, but not necessarily for toxicity generally.

1.2.2.4. Difficulties of Low-Dose Extrapolation

Example of Low-Dose Non-Linearity
Ionizing radiation risk is in great part based on health
outcomes from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki explosions, and
assume that cancer risk is proportional to dose, even at low
levels.
In careful experiments, researchers we able to irradiate the
nuclei of cells in Petri dishes with one alpha particle each,
creating mutations of a specific gene.
Irradiating 20 % of the nuclei produced 80 mutations per
100,000 cells.
Irradiating 5 % of the nuclei produced 57 mutations per
100,000 cells.
Bystander effects due to cell-to-cell communication are
thought to account at least in part for the observed nonlinearity14.

Patterns of toxicant distribution and metabolism differ
between low and high doses.
Using high exposures in experiments tends to target the
organ with the weakest elimination (short-term
bioaccumulation). This organ then becomes the determinant
of the TLV, although it may be the wrong target for chronic
exposure.

Defense mechanisms, active at low doses, may be disabled
at higher ones.
A low dose may be compensated by normal physiological
mechanisms, only a small fraction of the toxicity being
expressed in the model, as much of the toxicant is effectively
neutralized in a healthy subject.

1-24

3 – LONG-TERM EXTRAPOLATION
This is the assumption that brief tests (days to a year) can
represent decades of human life.
Many testing procedures in various areas of technology attempt
time-saving measures. In the testing of materials, higher
temperature or temperature cycling are often used to increase
the aging rate. In the testing of electrical cable insulation, the
frequency of the applied voltage can be increased.
In inorganic chemical reactions, concentration (law of Mass
Action) or temperature (Arrhenius equation) can be increased
to augment reaction rates.
These tactics cannot be used in toxicological models.
Biological molecules have limited tolerance to heat and pH.
Molecular components of living systems, particularly protein,
react and denature differentially under altered conditions
(temperature, pH, concentration).

2-year chronic animal test, animals go through maturation,
gestation, adulthood and aging, generally assumed to
correspond to segments of human life.
1.2.2.7. Choices in Toxicology

In the thinking of toxicologists, low-dose extrapolation is
thought to amplify the risk because more mechanisms of
toxicity are thought to be active at high doses than at low
doses.
To the contrary, long-term extrapolation is thought to attenuate
the risk because it does not take into account bio-accumulation
of agents, or slowly emerging damage.
Compensating one factor with the other, toxicologists often
simulate chronic low level exposures in humans using short
high level doses in an animal model.
Taken together, low-dose extrapolation and long-term
extrapolation pose formidable credibility problems for
toxicology. Would an athlete look the same after training
forcefully for 6 months as if he took it easy for 3 years ?
Therefore, a basic problem of Toxicology can be stated as:

1.2.2.6. Accelerating the passage of Time

There are however acceleration methods that are applicable to
biological models:
increasing the cell cycling (division) rate,
There is a generally higher susceptibility to toxicants by
organisms hosting rapidly dividing cells (fetus, bone marrow,
immune system).
cancer initiation-promotion,
In cancer research, promoters can be introduced to illuminate
and amplify the action of initiators, and vice-versa.
genetic susceptibility.
Animal models can be created with genetic susceptibility to
specific pathologies (for example, with one copy of p53
disabled, see Chapter 10).

Time does not respect what is done without it.

1.3. Dose and Time in Toxicity
High doses of toxicants generally have rapid effects, whereas
effects of lower doses may become detectable only much later.
This makes sense, since many physiological processes
accelerate when concentrations increase.
Since acute toxicity determinations are relatively simple, fast
and inexpensive, they form relatively little of the ongoing
activity in Toxicology.

However, most (brief) toxicological tests performed are
assumed with relatively little proof to be representative of risks
developing over much longer periods. Within the duration of a

A class of natural compounds with considerable acute toxicity
are venoms. They are rare in mammals, but very common in
1-25

1.3.1. Haber’s Law

lower life forms (snakes, spiders, anemones). The proteins and
peptides of venoms act rapidly.
Venoms target the blood and blood vessels, inhibiting clotting
and dilating vessels, leading to a loss of blood pressure. They
also target nerves and muscles by acting on calcium, potassium
and sodium-channel blockers, as well as sodium-channel
activators and prolongers and antagonists of nicotinic and
muscarinic receptors. Venoms are probably derived from the
immune system’s -defensin molecules, and are usually
represented in numerous types within the same animal to
maximize effectiveness.

The relationship between level of exposure and time of
exposure is quantified by Haber’s Law:

Toxicity  Potency  (Concentration  Threshold )  Time
where Toxicity quantifies the toxic effect,
Potency represents the toxic potency of the agent,
Concentration is the concentration of the agent or dose rate,
Threshold is the detoxification term, and
Time is the duration of agent administration.
According to Haber’s Law, any toxic effect is the product of
the Potency of the agent, its Time of application and its
Concentration minus a penalty term for metabolic
detoxification, “Threshold”.
Although Haber's Law is too simple to account for all aspects
of toxic reactions (for example, “Threshold” is typically a
function of agent concentration, rather than a constant, as we
will see in Chapter 4), it explains the assumptions most often
used by toxicologists, namely:

By contrast, considerable effort is expended on elucidating
more subtle effects that occur slowly at lower exposures. These
more common exposures, without being an immediate threat to
survival, may produce subtle alterations, with delayed impacts
on chronic survival or organ function. Teratogenicity and
carcinogenicity are such “subtle” effects. Those may develop
after some period of time, following a single high-level
exposure, repeated moderate exposures or continuous
exposures to low levels of agents for decades (T1.15).

The presence of “Threshold” in the equation justifies
the existence of a safe exposure. The claim is that no
hazard “exists” below a Threshold Limit Value (TLV).
Use the “Area-Under-the-Curve” (AUC) to average
exposures that vary over time, according to the
integration of Haber’s Law (below).

T1.15. Acute or delayed toxicity may occur after a single
high-level exposure. Repeated exposure at low levels may
manifest in subtle, chronically developing adverse effects.
EXPOSURE
EFFECTS
Single, High
Repeated, Moderate
Continuous,
Low-Level

Acute, immediate symptoms, or
delayed toxicity after some indeterminate time.
Covert (subtle) chronic symptoms, or
slow onset of symptoms.

Time Integrated Toxicity  Potency

Emergence of real risks after some time, or
risks merge with general background risks.



Concentration(t )  Threshold  dt

Haber’s Law is not often referred to in the description of
toxicology experiments, in great part because experiments
properly measuring exposure over time (as blood

1-26

concentrations, for example) are more difficult to perform than
the administration of a simple dose. This has lead many to use
more descriptive and approximate (as opposed to analytical)
methods 2.

THE TIME-WEIGHTED AVERAGE METRIC
ONLY APPROXIMATES TOXICITY
While the assumption that the Area under the Curve is the
proper exposure metric to gauge toxic effects, it is obviously
true only for slow-acting chemicals with straightforward
physiological actions.
There are many known exceptions to this rule. For example,
suppression of the immune system by diesel exhaust fumes is
more effective if smaller doses are repeated at intervals than if
one large single bolus is administered22.
In contrast to the case above, most toxicants, if administered
in many very small doses as opposed to a single large one,
will have negligible effects (because of the Threshold term in
Haber’s Law).

1.3.2. Area under the Curve

1.3.4. Time Course of Toxic Reactions
Toxic reactions unfold over periods ranging from a minute to a
lifetime. A toxicant reaches various sensitive sites within the
body at various moments, and multiple toxic effects from a
toxicant can each have secondary consequences. In some cases,
toxicity can be altogether delayed because of the need for
bioactivation. Because of basic as well as size differences,
toxicities can also happen at different rates in animal models
and in humans.

F1.16. The “Area Under the Curve” in an exposure vs time plot can be
used to quantify toxic effects.

1.3.3. Threshold Limit Values
Nevertheless, the legal protection of human health has taken
the form of threshold limit values (TLVs) using TimeWeighted-Averages (TWAs), compatible with Haber’s Law.
Short-term exposure levels (STELs) have been added to take
into account the more acute effects of exposure.

The acute effects may strike an organ or produce a disease
totally unrelated to the one that will become apparent as a
result of chronic exposure.

High exposures lead to frank effects on an organism that does
not have time to adapt. Low exposures may barely show any
effects until long into the future, with the added complexity
that the organism may adapt and age as the test proceeds.

Acute effects are generally well known and chronic effects
highly uncertain, because acute tests are cheap, while chronic
tests are expensive.

1-27

1.3.4.1. Toxidromes

Antidotes are usually given after the patient is stable,
preferably within a few hours of ingestion, and may require
multiple doses because of short durations of action.
Initial laboratory testing may include bicarbonate level,
electrolytes, serum urea nitrogen, and serum creatinine levels
to evaluate for renal failure and electrolyte imbalance; blood
glucose levels for hypoglycemic ingestion; electrocardiography
for cardiotoxicity; prothrombin time for coagulopathy; pulse
oximetry for hypoxia; serum acetaminophen level for
acetaminophen toxicity; and urine human chorionic
gonadotropin levels in female patients of childbearing age.

From the point of view of a victim, acute toxic reactions follow
a certain development over time, depending on the poison
concerned. This development is called a toxidrome. For a
physician, history of the patient is paramount, but the
toxidrome (i.e., appearance of symptoms) may provide
indications on the compound ingested and on the dose.
In occupational and environmental health, the cholinergic
toxidrome is the most important; other toxidromes
(anticholinergic, sympathomimetic, opioid, sedative/hypnotic,
hallucinogenic) are most often associated with overdoses of
drugs or medications. Interpretation can be complicated if
multiple substances are involved.

1.3.4.2. Cell Membrane Toxicity – Minutes

Toxic substances released in extracellular fluids rapidly meet
cell membranes. Alterations to the membranes come from
altering the state of membrane receptors (neurotransmission,
hormones, cytokines), dissolving or altering the lipid matrix, or
from binding or cross linking membrane protein. Such
toxicities can be established very rapidly, especially for some
agents that are quickly absorbed through the lungs.

Imagine a worker exposed to organophosphate pesticides
(malathion, diazinon), carbamates (physostigmine, carbaryl),
certain mushrooms or the warfare agent sarin. He is a victim of
the cholinergic toxidrome. Since there are various classes or
receptors in the body that could be stimulated in this
toxidrome, the symptoms could include any of those described
in Table 1.17.
T1.17. Cholinergic Toxidrome
MUSCARINIC
NICOTINIC
Pupil contraction
Pupil dilatation
Slow heartbeat
Fast heartbeat
Mucus in lung,
Bronchodilation
obstructed breathing
Vomiting, diarrhea
High blood pressure
Abundant saliva/tears Perspiration
Urinary incontinence Weakness (resp. arrest)

Acetylcholinesterase inhibition, which
over-stimulates membrane receptors, is
typical of warfare nerve gases such as
sarin. Neurotoxicants (DDT, pyrethroid
insecticides, tetrodotoxin-shown) either
block or alter the function of specialized
protein channels for inorganic
ions or neurotransmitters.
For example, ouabain (shown)
inhibits the cell membrane’s
Na+/K+ pump (ATPase
enzyme), eliminating its
electrical polarization.

CENTRAL
Agitation
Confusion
Lethargy
Coma
Seizure
Death

If a specific toxidrome is identified, the physician should
consider toxin-specific treatments, such as an antidote.
1-28

1.3.4.3. Cell Metabolism Toxicity - Hours

Organic solvents (ethanol, benzene) and anesthetics expand
lipid membranes and increase their fluidity and permeability.
Oxidation of membrane lipids (overwhelming the protection
provided by glutathione) occurs from herbicides such as
paraquat and diquat and from antibiotics such as adriamycin
and bleomycin.
Calcium in the blood is at a concentration of 0.002 M, but the
intracellular resting concentration of free calcium is 10 -7 M (a
ratio of 10,000). Inside the cell, low calcium concentrations are
maintained by sequestering calcium in mitochondria, the
smooth endoplasmic reticulum and by protein binding (to
regulators such as calmodulin). Carbon tetrachloride,
acetaminophen and tri-n-butyltin are examples of substances
that act by releasing calcium within cells, leading to loss of cell
functions and cell death (F1.18).

Metabolism uses external materials to produce living
substance: lipids, protein and nucleic acids. Toxic action occurs
by inhibiting materials absorption or bio-synthesis (T1.19).
A few metabolic toxicities occur extremely fast, because they
target bottlenecks of cell metabolism. Oxygen deprivation by
carbon monoxide suppresses ATP synthesis in the
mitochondrion, which can damage the brain within minutes.
Cyanide and H2S also block energy utilization and are
extremely fast acting. Milder reductions of mitochondrial
metabolism are obtained from the drugs salycilate and
tetracycline. Extensive studies have been done on the reaction
of mitochondria to a variety of toxicants (T1.20).2
Typically, metabolic toxicity develops a little more slowly than
in the extreme examples above, as
(1) blocking one pathway usually leaves alternatives for cells
to compensate with, and
(2) cells usually have some reserve which allows them to pull
through brief episodes of intoxication.
Many components of cells nevertheless need to be replaced, as
they wear out though normal metabolism. For example, RNA
is synthesized and replaced in cells approximately every day.
1.3.4.4. Cell Proliferation Toxicity - Days

Although most cells in vivo are in the resting (non-dividing)
phase, some are not. Body tissues with high growth rates are
F1.18. Tri-n-butyltin chloride mobilizes Ca2+ from the endoplasmic
reticulum, flooding the cytosol. The dark circles are calcium
transporters. Apoptosis results. Boelsterli, 2007.

2

About 1 in 5,000 women have mitochondrial mutations that lead to fatal disorders that affect
the muscles and the brain. They are passed from mother to child, as mitochondria are
maternally inherited. During in vitro fertilization, it is possible to move the nucleus of an egg
to the cytoplasm of an egg with healthy mitochondria.

1-29

bone marrow, small intestine, skin, hair and nails. Any
substance toxic to the mitotic apparatus will display cell
proliferation toxicity. Methotrexate, an anticancer drug which
inhibits DNA replication, is not toxic to cells in the resting
phase, but is highly toxic to proliferating cells. This is why
people undergoing chemotherapy are subject to hair loss,
digestive problems and low blood counts.
Any compound able to alter cell proliferation rate is a potential
teratogen, as the shaping of embryos is critically dependant on
speed of cell division.

T1.20. Changes in Mitochondria caused by Toxic substances.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

T1.19 . Inhibitors of Cell Metabolism.
RNA only
Actinomycin D
Streptomycin
Ethionine
Inhibit protein and RNA
Dimethylnitrosamine
synthesis
Carbon Tetrachloride
Galactosamine
Cycloheximide
Protein only
Chloramphenicol
Puromycin

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

1.3.4.5. Cell Oncogenicity - Years

Long-term experiments on toxicity teach us that the longer you
study toxicity, the more surprises there are.
Cancer is known as “a multiple step process”, and these steps
typically do not all occur within a very short period of time.
Even after a tumor cell is created, functionally significant
tumors need to grow in order to affect the organism, and be
detectable. So, cancer typically develops over years or decades.
In rat models, this period of cancer development is compressed
within a year.

20
21
22

Control (no exposure)
Methotrexate
Elongation
Condensed
Twisted
Oligomycin
Swollen
20,25-diazacholesterol
Enlarged matrix granule
Isonicotinic acid hydrazide
Swollen, collapsed cristae
Sodium fluoride
Asteroid inclusions
Diethylenetriaminetetraacetic
Aggregated matrix granules
acid
Puromycin
Vesicular cristae
Acetone
Outer membrane blebs
Fluoroacetate
Perpendicular stacks of cristae
Iodoacetate
Dense matrix
Ouabain
Mineral granule accumulation
Cyanide
Branching
Excess ferric ion
Ring formation
Excess calcium ion
Nesting cup formation
Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
Coagulated matricial protein
Clear matricial area with tail
Actinomycin D
formation
Puromycin
Disruption
Ouabain
Mineral granule accumulation
Cadmium ion
Scalloped outer margin

Mitochondria are former bacteria, and many antibiotics can lead to
mitochondrial failure through Reactive Oxygen Species generation.
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) can reduce the damage while maintaining
bactericidal action.

1-30

In New Guinea, the central nervous system disease called
“kuru” (connected with mad cow and Creutzfeld-Jacob
diseases) was related to the practice of ritual cannibalism that
included the eating of human brains, which was banned in the
late 1950s. According to epidemiological data, this prion-based
disease could have an incubation time of 34-41 years27.

1.4. Scope of Toxicological Data
A rounded approach to evaluating toxic risks includes:
physical and chemical characterization of the toxicant,
in vitro studies,
in vivo studies, and
epidemiology.
The types of studies chosen and how they are performed will
depend on the intent of the toxicity study. Because of cost,
acute (short) studies tend to be available in the literature and
reasonably well standardized, while chronic (long) studies tend
to be few, with more variation in the methods. The evidence
available for any toxic agent has accumulated over a period of
time, consequently the historical changes in methods and
emphasis bring unexpected diversity to an agent’s file.
The most inexpensive way to assess the toxicity of a chemical
is to do a literature review. For example, a review of
accidental or suicidal intoxications and of occupational
exposures may allow recognition of the acute hazards of the
agent.
If literature cannot be found, a modest investment in lab work
will yield acute studies of lethality (LD50), dermal sensitization,
genotoxicity and cytotoxicity in some models. Such models are
well controlled, but there is a problem in extrapolation from the
various models to human cases.

Mitochondrial Micrographs, x 25,000. See T1.19.
Brikhauser Verlag, Basel.

1-31

Some in vitro experiments are highly relevant to cancer risks
(cell proliferation studies, genetic determinations), while
computer modeling may be important to
compartmentalization (solubility and Toxicokinetics) and gross
assessment of toxicity.
The contributions of computer modeling and in vitro studies
are primarily in confirming and documenting basic effects and
mechanisms. Systematic efforts are being made to expand the
scope of these studies to provide more complete information
relevant to human risks.
Further experimental work and substantial resources can yield
in vivo genotoxicity, sub-acute, sub-chronic, chronic studies,
reproduction studies, etc. Chronic animal experiments are very
useful in assessing teratogenic and cancer risks.

On the other hand, when epidemiological studies are performed
using environments very similar to those that are of interest,
their conclusions can be very revealing of real human risks.

1.5. Toxicity Databases
1.5.1. Availability of Toxicity Information
Toxicology will not become decrepit for lack of new
chemicals, added at a rate of 36,000 new chemicals to the
Chemical Abstracts Service database every day…
Some 65,000 basic chemicals are used in industry to create 5
million compound products. Most of them have been in use for
many decades. Few have been re-assessed using the present,
more stringent requirements of regulatory bodies15. These
grandfather chemicals cause most of the problems.
A study by the US National Academy of Sciences reveals that
between 76 and 82 % of chemicals in commerce have too little
information to conduct a health-hazard assessment: virtually no
toxicity information, as shown in F1.21.

All experimental studies have in common the difficulty of
establishing appropriate levels of exposure for tests. Doses are
larger for acute studies than for chronic ones, and there is
always a risk in a chronic study of being “off the mark” due to
improper dosing.

“Adequate” toxicology exists for only 2-3 % of the chemicals.
In 1976, the US Toxic Substances Control Act established that
60,000 chemicals would be "grandfathered", and that the
Environmental Protection Agency would be responsible to
perform scattered tests on 100 chemicals, and to restrict the use
of 7 % of the chemicals introduced until 1979. This situation
has arisen due to:
the absence of demands for testing,
the lack of adequate testing protocols,
the large numbers of chemicals introduced since the
1950s.

The usefulness of many epidemiological studies is limited by
two factors:
(1) the duration and level of exposure: retrospective studies of
worker health typically involve complex exposures, for
example as a result of particularities in industrial processes and
as occupational health and safety regulations change over the
years,
(2) the simultaneous exposure to a mixture of agents, leading to
a difficulty in attributing observed health effects to any
individual component.

1-32

evidence of potential harm exists. 90 % of the new compounds
are approved without restrictions.
Most of the chemicals in use will have some information on
acute toxicity, but virtually none on reproductive toxicity,
teratogenicity or carcinogenicity. In the absence of a specific
"need to know", the costs and the time required discourage
retro-testing.
“Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS)” Compliance
Any RoHS compliant electronic and electronic component
is tested for Lead, Cadmium, Mercury, Hexavalent
chromium, Polybrominated biphenyls (PBB), and
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDE).
For Lead, Polybrominated biphenyls (PBB), and
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDE), there must be no
more than 0.1% of the material, when calculated by weight
at raw homogeneous materials.
For Cadmium and Hexavalent chromium, there must be less
than 0.01% of the substance by weight at raw homogeneous
materials.
Any RoHS compliant component must have 100 ppm or
less of mercury, and the mercury must not have been
intentionally added to the component.
One may derive the impression, from the above, that there is
never enough toxicity information. In some ways, this is true.
For toxicological science, it would be desirable to have
complete results on all substances. However, after the
understanding that the gathering of all potentially useful
information is impossibly expensive, the focus shifts to
gathering information of good quality and to obtaining the
relevant information (as opposed to the superfluous).

F1.21. Availability of health hazard assessments in seven categories15.

Only a quarter of the 82,000 chemicals in use in the US have
been tested for toxicity. Each year, the US EPA reviews 1700
new compounds to be introduced. They are tested only if

1-33

The strategy is to perform only the tests that need to be done to
recognize health risks. A major task of experimental
toxicologists is therefore to determine what data is critical to
safety, and how this data should be interpreted.
A vital aspect of resource use in toxicology is the use of broad
assumptions to qualify categories of chemicals, essentially
removing them from expensive experimentation lists because
some information is available on similar or connected
substances. Although such inferences are not always correct
and can lead to spectacular errors, Toxicology often plays the
differential science card, avoiding costly experimentation
based on acceptance that substances closely related in their
physical and chemical properties may share similar toxicity.

mechanism, involve a new variable, or occur over a longer time
frame than previously investigated.
An important line of defense is vigilance on the part of
occupational physicians, hygienists, toxicologists and workers
themselves, which has contributed significantly to identifying
overt as well as covert hazards. The reinvestigation of
particular chemicals is frequently driven by a chance
observation, a bizarre effect on an exposed individual, or an
epidemic intoxication.
In the introductory chapter to a New York Academy of
Sciences volume "celebrating" the passage of 200 years since
Percival Pott's paper linking soot with scrotal cancer in
chimney sweeps, Wagoner made a critical observation16.
Despite the fact that we know about occupational
carcinogenicity associated with coal and oil combustion
products, radioactivity, inorganic arsenic, aromatic amines,
asbestos, etc., we still have workers exposed to these agents,
and they are dying at rates far higher that the normal
population. What has been accomplished in these 200 years, if
excess exposures still occur?
There is little concern about many of these chemicals, because
they have been in use for a long time and are widely
distributed. Often, the agent is not connected to the disease, or
the disease is difficult to diagnose.

1.5.2. Reliability of Toxicity Information
Agreement among experts is not always a guarantee of safety.
Science often proceeds as a self-centered peer-review process
(F1.22), which makes it vulnerable. Toxicology, for practical
reasons, is more sensitive to toxicities that have obvious
manifestations, and that develop over the short term.
Many sciences suffer from this vulnerability:
microbiology is biased towards the study of organisms that
proliferate well in current culture media, and chemistry favors
molecules that are easy to isolate, and are conveniently stable.
F1.22. Sometimes,
science can lose
perspective.

Consider the uranium miners from East Germany and their
lung cancers resulting from poor to negligible occupational
health practices during decades17. Lung cancer and disease
killed at least 20,000 miners out of a workforce of 450,000 as a
consequence of exposure to radiation and dusts.
Consider the neurotoxic disorders, one among a list of 10
leading work-related diseases identified by NIOSH 18.
Neurotoxicity can be severe and debilitating, with a large
numbers of workers at risk. A vast array of commonly used

American Scientist, Nov-Dec
2003.

When new
deleterious effects
are detected, we
often find that they
spring from a new
1-34

chemicals are associated with diverse neurological signs and
symptoms, resulting in peripheral and central nervous system
damage18.
Consider the toxicity of lead (Pb) with effects on the nervous
system (neuropathy and behavioral-learning deficits), the liver,
the kidney and the hematopoietic system.

T1.23.INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS IN SOME EEC
COUNTRIES FOR NOTIFICATION AND HAZARD
ASSESSMENT OF NEW CHEMICALS
IDENTITY OF THE SUBSTANCE
 
Name
 
Names in the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
nomenclature
 
Other names (usual name, trade name, abbreviation)
 
Chemical Abstracts Service number (if available)
 
Empirical and structural formula
 
Composition of the substance
 
Degree of purity (%)
 
Nature of impurities, including isomers and by-products
 
Percentage of (significant) main impurities
 
If the substance contains a stabilizing agent or an inhibitor or other
additives, specify: nature, order of magnitude:. ppm;.%
 
Spectral data (Ultra Violet, Infra Red, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance)
 
Methods of detection and determination
 
A full description of the methods used or the appropriate bibliographical
references

1.5.3. Regulations on Toxicity Information
Public and worker concerns, encouraged by the media, are
demanding more information about chemicals manufactured or
imported, distributed across the country by rail, truck or ship,
used in various industries, in the home and garden, and
disposed of when no longer needed.
National and international regulatory agencies are requiring
more extensive data for each chemical entering the marketplace
(T1.23). Under current Canadian, US and OECD/EC regulatory
requirements, new chemicals must be accompanied by a basic
package of certain toxicity tests (varying with the volume
being imported or manufactured per year).
The list below is the information requirement for countries of
the European Community.
Similar data is required for new chemicals under the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act of 1999
(http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/C-15.31/text.html).
Also included at the end of this table is information concerning
disposal of the agent, designed both for industry and the
individual user, in keeping with the "cradle-to-grave"
responsibility of industries for their products.

1-35

INFORMATION ON THE SUBSTANCE
 
Proposed uses
 
Types of use
Describe: the function of the substance, the desired effects
 
Fields of application with approximate breakdown
 closed system, industries, farmers and skilled trades,
 use by the public at large, open system, industries
 farmers and skilled trades, use by the public at large
 
Estimated production and imports for each of the anticipated uses or fields
of application
 
Overall production and imports in order of tons per year [1, 10, 50, 100,
500, 1,000 and 5,000]
 first 12 months
 thereafter
 
Production and imports, broken down in accordance with fields of
application, expressed as a percentage,
 first 12 months
 thereafter
 
Recommended methods and precautions concerning:
 handling
 storage
 transport
 fire (nature of combustion gases or pyrolysis. where proposed uses
justify)
 other dangers, particularly chemical reaction with water.
 
Emergency measures in the case of accidental spillage
 
Emergency measures in the case of injury to persons (e.g. poisoning)

TOXICOLOGICAL STUDIES
 
Acute toxicity
Substances other than gases shall be administered via two routes at least one
of which should be the oral route. The other route will depend on the
intended use and on the physical properties of the substance. Gases and
volatile liquids should be administered by inhalation (a minimum period of
administration of four hours) in all cases, observation of the animals should
be carried out for at least 14 days. Unless there are contraindications, the rat
is the preferred species for oral and inhalation experiments. The experiments
shall be carried out on both male and female subjects.
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

PHYSICO-CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF THE SUBSTANCE
 
Melting point
 
Boiling point (.C at . Pa)
 
Relative density (D420)
 
Vapour pressure (.Pa at .C)
 
Surface tension (N/m at.C)
 
Water solubility (mg/litre at.C)
 
Fat solubility
 
Solvent-oil [to be specified] (mg/100g solvent at.C)
 
Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water)
 
Flash point (.C in open cup and closed cup)
 
Flammability
 
Explosive properties
 
Auto-flammability (.C)
 
Oxidizing properties

 

1-36

Administered orally (LD50 in mg/kg)
 Effects observed, including in the organs
Administered by inhalation (LC50 in ppm)
 Duration of exposure in hours
 Effects observed, including in the organs
Administered cutaneously, percutaneous absorption (LD50 in mg/l)
 Effects observed. including in the organs
Skin irritation
 The substance should be applied to the shaved skin of an animal,
preferably an albino rabbit.
 Duration of exposure in hours.
Eye irritation
 The rabbit is the preferred animal
 Duration of exposure in hours
Skin sensitization
 To be determined by a recognized method using a guinea pig
Sub-acute toxicity (28 days)
 Effects observed on the animal and organs according to the
concentrations used, including clinical and laboratory investigations
 Dose for which no toxic effect is observed
 A period of daily administration (five to seven days per week) for at
least four weeks should be chosen. The route of administration
should be the most appropriate having regard to the intended use,
the acute toxicity and the physical and chemical properties of the
substance. Unless there are contra-indications, the rat is the
preferred species for oral and inhalation experiments.
Mutagenicity (including carcinogenic pre-screening test)
 The substance should be examined during a series of two tests one
of which should be bacteriological. with and without metabolic
activation. and one non-bacteriological.

ECO-TOXICOLOGICAL STUDIES
 
Effects on organisms
 
Acute toxicity for fish (LC50 in ppm)
 Duration of exposure
 Species selected (one or more)
 
Acute toxicity for Daphnia (LC50 in ppm)
 Duration of exposure
 
Degradation - biotic and abiotic
 
The Biological Oxygen Demand and the Biological Oxygen
Demand/Chemical Oxygen Demand ratio should be determined as a
minimum.

T1.24. COMPONENT PARTS OF THE
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS
SECTION I. Identity
Product name, family/chemical name, product type, Department of
Transport category, hazard rating, fire rating, reactivity, emergency
phone response number, prepared by.
SECTION II. Hazardous Ingredients
Ingredients with ACGIH, OSHA TLVs PELs and CAS no. plus
source of information. Flags the hazardous ingredients.
SECTION III. Physical Data
Physical state, specific gravity, density, boiling point, percent
volatiles, evaporation rate, odor, appearance.
SECTION IV. Fire and Explosion Hazard
Flash point, flammable limits, autoignition temperature,
extinguishing media, fire-fighting procedures.
SECTION V. Health Hazard Data
Primary route of exposure (dermal, oral, eye, inhalation), overexposure effects (irritation, sensitization) for acute and chronic
effects, special toxicity (mutagenicity, teratogenicity,
carcinogenicity, reproduction/fertility). Emergency and first aid
procedures.
SECTION VI. Reactivity Data
Stability, incompatibility (materials to avoid), conditions to avoid,
hazardous decomposition products, hazardous polymerization.
SECTION VII. Spill or Leak procedures
Spill control: how to do it, and what with. Waste disposal methods.
SECTION VIII. Special protection information
Respiratory protection (type of equipment needed), protective
clothing (gloves, suits, eye, shoes).
SECTION IX. Special precautions
Handling, shipping and storage precautions, special warnings.
SECTION X. Regulatory information.
DOT class number, other departmental numbers (US-TSCA, USRCRA, CERCLA status, etc.)

POSSIBILITY OF RENDERING THE SUBSTANCE HARMLESS
 
For industry/skilled trades
 Possibility of recovery
 Possibility of neutralization
 Possibility of destruction:
 controlled discharge
 incineration
 water purification station
 others.
 
For the public at large
 Possibility of recovery
 Possibility of neutralization
 Possibility of destruction:
 controlled discharge
 incineration.
 water purification station
 others.

1.5.4. Material Safety Data Sheets
Much of the information above can be incorporated into the
standardized Material Safety Data Sheet. The MSDS is a
complete, up-to-date set of information for each product that a
company manufactures or uses which, by law, must be
available at all times in the Health or Safety office. The US
Occupational Health and Safety Agency requires MSDSs for at
least 600 chemicals. Companies are not required to perform
tests, but to list what they know, including:
1-37

pharmacy of a hospital, with little training and no full time
staff. There has been a tendency since the 1970s to reduce the
number of poison centers and to provide them with better
trained staff. Children under the age of 5 are responsible for 60
% of calls to poison centers.
The most used databases for poison centers are POISINDEX,
DRUGDEX, TOMES and TOXNET.

the ingredients and quantities in the formulation,
the physicochemical properties of each ingredient,
the safety procedures and emergency first aid treatments,
a section (Section V) dealing with toxicity data.
A quick review of most MSDSs reveals rather limited toxicity
information. Section V usually relates to adverse health effects
from acute, high level exposure through the oral, ocular,
cutaneous or respiratory pathways, usually expressed as LD50
(in mg/kg body weight) as determined in a rodent model.
An example of a rather rich MSDS, for benzene, is available at:
Principles of Toxicology DVD:\ Benzene MSDS.pdf.

For example, TOXNET is a computer system run by the
National Library of Medicine that includes a number of
toxicological databases managed by the Environmental
Protection Agency, the National Cancer Institute, and the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. For
more specific information, go to
http://www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov

The delayed effects are usually more sparingly documented,
even if, for certain classes of chemicals (halogenated
hydrocarbon solvents, pesticides), the delayed toxicity is of
greater concern. Any longer term (subchronic) toxicity test is
generally also in the form of a rodent study.

The databases included in TOXNET are:
CCRIS (Chemical Carcinogenesis Research Information
System),
DART (Developmental and Reproductive Toxicity Database),
DBIR (Directory of Biotechnology Information Resources),
EMICBACK (Environmental Mutagen Information Center
Backfile),
GENE-TOX (Genetic Toxicology),
HSDB (Hazardous Substances Data Bank),
IRIS (Integrated Risk Information System, from EPA),
http://www.epa.gov/iriswebp/iris/index.html
RTECS (Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances),
and
TRI (Toxic Chemical Release Inventory).

The MSDS database is essential because workers can be
exposed accidentally to chemicals during manufacture,
transportation, and ultimate use. Invariably, accidents will
occur despite training, precautions, etc.
1.5.5. Poisoning Databases
Acute toxicity studies can go far beyond the determination of
the LD50, for example into the measures needed to manage
acute poisonings in humans.
The first emergency centers were created in 1949 in
Copenhagen and Budapest. Information became systematized
and computerized more thoroughly in the 1950s, when centers
aimed at pediatric and general population poisonings started to
grow. Most were operated as part of the emergency or

For example, HSDB contains chemical-specific information
on:
manufacturing and use,
1-38

chemical and physical properties,
safety and handling,
toxicity and biomedical effects,
pharmacology,
environmental fate and exposure potential,
exposure standards and regulations,
monitoring and analysis methods,
and additional references.
1.5.6. Hygiene and Research Databases
1. A booklet for hygiene and for general toxicology work,
NIOSH’s Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards (2005) is a short
toxicity summary for hygiene purposes (T1.25). A condensed
version is provided at Principles of Toxicology CD:\NIOSH
Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards 2007.pdf or at
http://www.cdc. gov/niosh/npg/.
2. For in-depth toxicity work, Sax’s Dangerous Properties of
Industrial Materials provides more information (1.26). It
delivers in extremely abbreviated form the results of 45
toxicity studies for benzene, a real time-saver when doing
research work.
3. The Internet. See Principles of Toxicology DVD:\Web
Pages\WWW Risk Assessment Resources.pdf. Anyone
wishing information about an agent has access to Internet
resources, and may take the time to read basic research articles.
As a toxicologist, you will be called upon to interpret this
database for your employers, the employees, those considering
litigation against a company, etc.
T1.25. NIOSH’s Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards.

1-39

T1.26. Sax’s Dangerous
Properties of Industrial
Materials.

1-40

Inhalation toxicology,
Mechanistic toxicology,
Metals toxicology,
Molecular toxicology,
Neurotoxicology,
Epidemiology,
Occupational Health,
Regulatory and Safety evaluation,
Reproductive and Developmental toxicology,
Risk Assessment,
Toxicological and Exploratory pathology…

1.6. Toxicologists in Society
What do toxicologists do ?
Some are employed by the government (Health Canada), others
by the private sector. They can be involved in the protection of
workers (Occupational Health) or of the general population
(Public Health).
The may be concerned with pharmaceuticals (clinical
toxicologists, poison specialists), household products,
industrial and agricultural chemicals and food additives.
They perform tests in laboratories (research and development,
evaluation of test results), risk analysis (literature reviews) and
develop policy and regulations for government or corporations.

Of course, toxicologists may also pursue academic careers in
universities.
REFERENCES

They may serve on committees determining Safe Human Doses
or product safety and labeling regulations.

1. Inherent toxicity of aggregates implies a common mechanism for protein misfolding diseases. Bucciantini M et al.
Nature, vol 416, 507-511, 4th of April 2002.
2. The role of time in toxicology or Haber’s (c x t) product. Karl K. Rozman, Toxicology 149, 35–42, 2000.
3. Some notes on the history of Haber’s Law. Witschi, H. Toxicological Sciences 50, 164-168, 1999.
4. Stimulating Research to Improve the Scientific Basis of Risk Assessment. Rory B. Conolly, Barbara D. Beck, and Jay I.
Goodman, Toxicological Sciences 49, 1-4, 1999.
5. Hormesis; dose dependent reverse effects of low and very low doses. Oberbaum M., Cambar J. in “Ultra High Dilution,
Physiology and Physics”, Endler and Schulte Eds, Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dordrecht, 5-19, 1994.
6. Enhanced induction of lymphokine-activated killer activity following a single dose of cisplatin in cancer patients.
Arinaga S, M.Adashi, N.Karimine, H.Inoue, T.Asoh, H.Ueo, T.Akiyoshi, Int.J.Immunpharmac., 16 : 519-524, 1994.
7. In vitro stimulation of human granulocytes and lymphocytes by pico- and fentogram quantities of cytostatic agents.
Wagner H, B.Kreher, K.Jurcic, Arzneim.Forsch./Drug Res., 38 : 273-275, 1988.
8. Effects of extracts of western red-cedar heartwood on certain wood-decaying fungi in culture. Southam CM, J.Erlich,
Phytopathology, 33 : 515-524, 1948.
9. Hormesis- Stimulation of colony growth in Campanularia flexuosa, (hydrozoa) by copper, cadmium and other
toxicants. Stebbing ARD. Aquatic Tox., 1 : 227-238, 1981.
10. Molybdenum and tungsten in biology. Russ Hille. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2002, 27:360-367.
11. Drug-like properties and the causes of poor solubility and poor permeability. Lipinski CA . Journal of
Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods. 44 235-249, 2000.
12. A new emphasis for drug discovery, development and parallel synthesis. Verheij H et al. Laboratory Focus, 9-11,
March 2002.
13. The olfactory receptor gene superfamily of the mouse. NatureNeuroscience 5:124-33, 2002.
14. Radiation risk to low fluences of [alpha ] particles may be greater than we thought. Hongning Zhou et al, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, Vol. 98, Issue 25, 14410-14415, December 4, 2001.
15. National Research Council. Toxicity Testing. Strategies to Determine Needs and Priorities. Executive Summary,
National Academy Press, 1984.
16. Occupational carcinogenesis: the two hundred years since Percival Pott. Wagoner, J. In Occupational Carcinogenesis,
Saffiotti, U. and Wagoner, J. (Eds.). Ann. N.Y. Acad. Scis.271, 1-4, 1976.
17. A grisly archive of key cancer data. Kahn, P. Science 259, 448-451, 1993.
18. Leading work-related diseases and injuries - United States. Neurotoxic disorders Anonymous. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report 35, #4, 113-121, 1986.
19. Pb(II)-translocating P-type ATPases. Rensing C et al. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 4;273(49):32614-7.
20. Loss of silent-chromatin looping and impaired imprinting of DLX5 in Rett syndrome. Shin-ichi Horike et al. Nature
Genetics OnLine, 19 December 2004
21. Dose-additive carcinogenicity of a defined mixture of "dioxin-like compounds". Walker NJ et al. Environ Health
Perspect. 113(1):43-8, Jan 2005.
22. Suppression of cell-mediated immune responses to Listeria infection by repeated exposure to diesel exhaust

Environmental toxicologists are concerned with the persistence
of chemicals in the environment, food chain accumulation and
with the consequences of toxicants to the biota.
They may be involved in public relations, in scientific writing
for the public and in legal proceedings, as expert witnesses.
The Society of Toxicology lists the following specialties:
Biological Modeling,
Carcinogenesis,
Comparative and Veterinary toxicology,
Dermal toxicology,
Food Safety,
Immunotoxicology,
In Vitro toxicology,
1-41

particles in brown Norway rats. Yin, X.J. . . . and J.K.H. Ma. Toxicological Sciences 77(February):263-271. 2004.
23. Second-hand exposure to propofol and fentanyl in the operating room: Anesthesiologists' occupational opiate
addiction. Gold, M.S., et al. Society for Neuroscience annual meeting. Oct. 23. San Diego. 2004.
24. Removing the threat of diclofenac to critically endangered Asian vultures. Swan, G., et al. PLoS Biology 4
(March):e66. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0040066. 2006.
25. Effects of ultra low concentrations of endosulfan on California amphibians. Hunt, J., and D. Sparling. SETAC North
America 26th Annual Meeting. Nov. 13-17. Baltimore. 2005.
26. Third National Report on Human Exposures to Environmental Chemicals. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Atlanta: July 2005.
27. Kuru in the 21st century—an acquired human prion disease with very long incubation periods. Collinge J et al.
Lancet 367 (June 24):2068-2074. Abstract available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68930-7. 2006.
28. Phylogenetically Informed Analysis of the Allometry of Mammalian Basal Metabolic Rate Supports Neither
Geometric Nor Quarter-Power Scaling. White et al. Evolution 63(10):2658-2667. 2009.
29. Hormesis Outperforms Threshold Model in National Cancer Institute Antitumor Drug Screening Database.
Edward J. Calabrese, John W. Staudenmayer, Edward J. Stanek III, and George R. Hoffmann. Toxicological Sciences 94(2),
368–378 (2006).
30. Adaptive radiation-induced epigenetic alterations mitigated by antioxidants. Autumn J. Bernal, Dana C. Dolinoy,
Dale Huang, David A. Skaar, Caren Weinhouse and Randy L. Jirtle. The FASEB Journal Vol. 27 February 2013
www.fasebj.org

1-42

2.1. Complexity of Toxic Effects .2
2.1.1. Low-Dose Toxic Effects . 2
2.1.2. Significant vs Trivial Risks . 2
2.1.3. Tox File Diversity .3
2.2. The Choice of Graphs .3
2.3. Dose-Response Relations .4
2.4. Characteristics of Dose- Response Curves .5
2.4.1. Efficacy . 5
2.4.2. Potency .5
2.4.3. Spread . 5
2.4.4. Statistical Dispersion .5
2.5. Analysis of Dose-Response Curves. 6
2.5.1. Multi-Target Model .6
2.5.2. Toxicant to Receptor Binding . 7
2.5.3. Dose-Response of Complex Systems . 10
2.5.3.1. Central Limit Theorem . 10
2.5.3.2. Probit Scale . 12
2.6. Dose-Response Examples . 12
2.6.1. Example 1: Rat Ileum . 12
2.6.2. Example 2: Cancer in Rats . 13
2.6.3. Example 3: Anesthesia . 13
2.7. Hazard & Risk Assessment . 13
2.7.1. Components of Risk Assessment . 13
2.7.2. ”Strength of Evidence” Criteria. 16
2.7.3. Threshold-Relationships . 16
2.7.4. Safety Factors . 17
2.7.5. Non-Threshold Relationships . 18
2.7.6. Integration of Multiple Exposures . 19
2.7.7. Precautionary Principle . 20
2.7.8. Hazards of Risk Assessment . 20

2.7.8.1. Toxicology vs Risk Assessment. 20
2.7.8.2. Objectivity in Risk Assessment . 20
2.7.8.3. Example 1: DDT . 21
2.7.8.4. Example 2: Thimerosal . 22
2.7.8.5. Factors Influencing Risk Assessment . 22
2.7.8.6. Manipulation of Risk Assessment . 22
2.7.9. An Example of Risk Assessment . 23
2.7.9.1. Introduction and Historical Perspectives . 23
2.7.9.2. Animal Metabolism and Kinetics . 23
2.7.9.3. Summary of the Toxicology of CE in Humans
. 25
2.7.9.4. Extrapolation of the Animal and Human Data
. 25
2.7.9.5. Safe Human Dose Threshold Model using Noncancer Animal Data. 25
2.7.9.6. Safe Human Dose Threshold Model using Noncancer Human Data . 26
2.7.9.7. Safe Human Dose Non-Threshold Model using
Cancer Animal Data . 26
2.7.9.8. Safe Human Dose Non-Threshold Model using
Cancer Human Data . 26
2.7.9.9. Recommended Groundwater Standard . 27
2.7.9.10. Summary of the Estimates of Risk . 28

2-1

at low concentrations, are prime candidates for
low-dose risks. Five years ago, almost all cases
of environmental hormones (ex, nonylphenol,
phthalates6) involved estrogen (estradiol is
shown). More recently, agents substituting
melatonin (shown), anti-androgens and thyroid
hormones have emerged.

2.
2.1. Complexity of Toxic Effects
All toxic agents have multiple effects occurring at different
doses, and within specific time intervals, as shown in F2.1.
A critical decision in the practice of Risk Assessment is
focusing on one or a few toxicity variables to estimate the Safe
Human Dose. Which critical toxicity variable or disease rate is
most affected by the agent, and to what extent should exposure
be limited to protect human or animal health ?

2.1.2. Significant vs Trivial Risks
Protective limits for an agent should take into account its
lowest-dose significant risk. The decision of which risk to
retain as significant is one that must be made on the basis of
the deepest knowledge of physiology and epidemiology
available.
Perhaps the greatest weakness of Risk Assessment is that its
view is limited by the evidence available. It is impractical to
test all body systems in sufficient detail to dispel all doubts
about the safety of an agent.

Extensive data for a particular toxicity variable or test system
may be available simply because a laboratory was funded to
conduct the research, or because the measurement is
convenient or inexpensive (ex, Ames test). The toxicologist
aims to compensate for these biases, looking to obtain from
restricted evidence a toxicity determination that is as
comprehensive as possible.
2.1.1. Low-Dose Toxic Effects
The appreciation of the full toxicity of an agent often proceeds
historically through a series of successive discoveries. For
example, it has been known for a long time that arsenic kills
rapidly in high doses (8 mg/kg in the rat).
But it is relatively recent knowledge that at doses of 7 ppm in
water, it leads to narrowing of the carotid artery1 and that it can
act as an endocrine disruptor3,5. Further, it interferes with the
action of glucocorticoids at an environmental concentration of
10 ppb.
More subtle toxic effects are often uncovered over time.
Environmental hormones, compounds that can alter physiology

F2.1 Plurality of Effects for a Toxicant.
In Vitro Methods in Toxicology, Jolles and Cordier, 1990

2-2

Files compiled for an agent typically contain a large number of
studies. A first triage is usually made on the basis of
species (human, rodent, cells),
route of administration (inhaled, cutaneous, oral
exposures) and
time-frame (acute, chronic).
If biological exposure indices such as blood or plasma levels
are available, this helps to make comparisons between studies
more enlightening, particularly if the targets of the toxicant are
known.
An important practical problem is that Safe Human Doses are
intended to limit lifetime exposures, while few laboratory
studies ever provide this time frame. Epidemiology often
provides a more chronic perspective than experiments, but
typically its results are much more difficult to interpret.

amplitude range (orders of magnitude). On a linear scale, the
relative changes occurring at low values would be obscured,
compressed in the early part of the graph.
F2.2 shows the same financial data (Dow Jones industrial
average) presented in 3 different ways. One gets quite a
different impression about the evolution of the economy,
according to the axial metric chosen.

F2.2. The leftmost graph (linear-linear) gives the impression of a
rapidly expanding economy in recent years. The middle graph (log –
linear) suggests a steady evolution. The rightmost graph (log-log)
shows a tendency to saturation. So, how is the economy actually
evolving ? American Scientist, 89:210

2.1.3. Tox File Diversity
The diversity of scientific knowledge can become an obstacle
to obtaining a clear assessment of risk. Some studies often
promote particular interests and methods, and high political
stakes often tend to disintegrate a unified picture of risk. This
can give the impression of an absence of coherence or
reliability in science. The real problem is that risk is itself fairly
complex in that it can apply to different organs, populations
and situations. It is therefore often difficult to come to a single
limit that will satisfy all points of view. Often the Safe Human
Dose will be determined by focusing on a few strategically
chosen studies.

Note the following about log scales.
-There is no “0”.
-A log scale displays normal number labels that are positioned according to
a log scale. The grids along the log scale change abruptly from intervals of
10 to intervals of 100, for example.
-You cannot re-number these labels, but you can choose the position of the
decimal points.
-Equal-sized steps along a log scale correspond to a multiplication factor.

Toxicology uses specific conventions in its choice of graph
axes, and these conventions can be justified using MichaelisMenten kinetics or statistical arguments, as we shall see later in
this chapter. The graphic conventions (log axes) used in
Toxicology are set to ease detection of specific dependencies
anticipated from experimental results. However, one should
use log scales cautiously…

2.2. The Choice of Graphs
The choice of graphic representations for toxicity data as a
function of dose is important because graphs have a suggestive
influence. One frequently quoted motive to use logarithmic
axes is to view more clearly data spanning a very wide
2-3

Do not let tricky graphs cloud your thinking about problems
they are intended to illuminate.

2.3. Dose-Response Relations
Quantitative Toxicology relates exposure (usually expressed as
toxicant concentration x exposure duration) and the toxicity
produced (changes in liver, renal, neurological, pulmonary
function, etc.), in other words, the dose-response relationship.
There is a great deal of emphasis in Toxicology on
documenting fairly conventional, progressive dose-response
relationships similar to F2.3. Obtaining a “proper” relation
gives the experimenter or the epidemiologist confidence that
his data is sound. However, this frequently observed curve type
is not the only one possible, as was shown by the class of
chemical known as “endocrine disruptors”10, for example, and
one should be prepared to accept unusual dose-response
dependencies. Agents can be more toxic at lower doses than at
higher ones, as can be seen in T2.2a and F2.2a. Examples
include polluants that resemble hormones, drugs4,
electromagnetic radiation and ionizing radiation.

F2.2a. Unusual Dose-Responses,
and an illustration of how the
Risk could be erroneously
assessed.

So, if an unusual dependency
is found, one must look hard
at the data to determine if the
relation is the result of
artefacts or of true
physiology. Unusual dose-responses are less likely in more
complex systems. Therefore, epidemiologists scrutinizing large
populations are less likely to observe them than laboratory
experimenters.

T2.2a. Unusual Dose-Effect Curves
Agent

Observation

Ref.

di-2-ethylhexyl
phthalate (DEHP,
a plastic-softening
agent)

Low DEHP dose suppresses brain activity
of aromatase, critical for male development,
while higher doses stimulate it.

9

X-rays and Gamma
radiation

1 Gy increases lifetime risk of cancer by 5
percent, while 0.1 Gy defends against
cancer.

8

Electromagnetic
Radiation

Calcium efflux in nerve cells is stimulated
within an intensity window only.

7

Emphasis on documentation of the dose-response tends to
obscure other aspects of toxicity, specifically:
whether the outcome variable chosen is the most relevant
one to determine a Safe Human Dose for the agent,
the influence of time: most tests are too short (to conserve
resources), thereby blinding the testing process to the
2-4

concentration or total dosage) is required to obtain half of the
maximum effect (efficacy = 0.5) is commonly used to derive a
measure of toxicant potency.
A drug that requires a lower dose than another drug to obtain
the same half-maximum effect is therefore considered to be
more potent. F2.7 illustrates 3 curves of different potency.

evolution and reversibility of toxicity.
"DOSE" refers to the mass administered (ex, 10 mg of
diazepam) and does not account for the size or weight of the
animal. Generally, body burden is also expressed as an
absolute mass of substance.
"DOSAGE" refers to the mass per body weight of the
individual (ex, 0.2 mg/kg of body weight).
"TOTAL DOSAGE" takes into account the duration of
exposure: a dosage of 10 mg/kg per day for 10 days translates
to a Total Dosage of 100 mg .day / kg.

2.4.3. Spread
Some dose-response curves are very steep, while others need
larger changes of dosage for the same change in toxic effect.
F2.4 shows curves with different spreads. Spread can be
specified by the toxicant dosage ratio between 10 % and 90 %
efficacy. In F2.4, the curve on the left has a 10-90 % spread of
21.9, while the curve on the right has a 10-90 % spread of
3.88.

2.4. Characteristics of Dose- Response
Curves
Many dose-response curves can be characterized according to
the following characteristics: Efficacy, Potency, Spread and
Statistical Dispersion.

2.4.4. Statistical Dispersion
If a group of animals in a
laboratory study is given
exactly the same dose of
a chemical, the response
from each animal will be
at least slightly different.

2.4.1. Efficacy
The curve between dosage and resulting toxicity defines
whether a given agent (say, caffeine) is effective at producing a
given toxicity (say, a rise in heart rate).
The efficacy of an agent relates to the maximum effect that it
can produce at any concentration (see F2.8).
Often, it is also appropriate to express the efficacy of an agent
by comparing it to the maximum effect that can be obtained on
a living system by the most effective chemical known. The
ratio of the particular agent’s result to the system’s maximum
response thus determines efficacy in a range from 0 to 1.

There is also an uncertainty as to the dose actually received by
each animal. For example, in the example above, the toxicant
may be mixed with food, and each animal does not eat exactly
the same amount. In laboratory studies, the inaccuracy in the


Drug expiration dates specify the manufacturer’s guarantee of full potency
and safety. It is safe to take drugs past their expiration dates. Even 10 years
past the date, most drugs have a good deal of their original potency. So, if
your life depends on an expired drug and you must have 100 % of its
original strength, you should toss it, but if not, use it and see what happens.
90 % of drugs are safe and effective as far as 15 years past their expiration
dates. Exceptions: nitroglycerin, insulin and some liquid antibiotics.

2.4.2. Potency
An agent’s efficacy tells us something about its maximum
effect, but not about how much of the agent is needed to obtain
a given effect. A “reading” of how much of the agent (mg,
2-5

dose (horizontal) is usually fairly small, but the dispersion of
the toxic reaction (vertically) cannot be controlled.
For example, if one uses a group of 6 animals, yielding 6
individual toxicity responses at a given dose, these 6 outcomes
can be used to determine a mean response, as well as a
standard deviation for this outcome at that dose.
Even in the case where the outcome is rated as all-or-nothing,
such as presence of cancer, the number of animals used in any
given study limits the reliability of the probability of getting
cancer, particularly if the risk is small.
Although laboratory experimenters mostly attempt to reduce
the dispersion in their data by keeping tight control over
animals (to the point of using animal clones) and test
conditions, dispersions in toxicity reactions are part of the
data, if the data is to be relevant to a complex environment.
In epidemiological studies, there are uncertainties associated
with gathering data from populations, and also uncertainties in
the estimates of their exposures.

In any dose-response graph, such as F2.3, both the variable
describing the toxicity (here, tumor incidence), as well as that
describing dose (horizontal), show statistical dispersions.
Therefore, obtaining data dispersions representative of realworld situations may be legitimate objectives in laboratory
experiments as well as in epidemiological investigations.

2.5. Analysis of Dose-Response Curves
2.5.1. Multi-Target Model
We study toxic dose-responses by building simple
mathematical models of toxicity. Let us imagine that we
initially have a group of N0 cells exposed to a toxic dose (D).
A number of cells (N) survive the exposure, while the others
die. If we perform the experiment repeatedly at various doses,
we can obtain dose responses such as in F2.4.
Considering the set of experiments on the blue curve, the
supplementary number of cells dying (dN) per exposure
increment (dD) is proportional to the number of cells (N) living
at the lower dose multiplied by the “toxic slope” variable, “t”.
This assumes the same toxic slope at all levels of toxicity.
dN

t N
dD
After exposure “D”, the cell number declines from N0 to N:
N
D
dN
No N   t 0 dD

N
 t D
N0
The proportion of surviving cells is:
N
 e t D
N0
ln

F2.3. Horizontal and Vertical dispersions.

2-6

In this simple model, an infinite dose is needed to kill all the
cells.
We can define Toxicity (T) as the fraction of dead cells:
No  N No  No e t D
Toxicity 

 1  e t D
No
No
At this point, we modify the model slightly. The death of a cell
can occur from a single toxic hit (F2.4, blue curve), or it can
occur from numerous “hits” (below) to a single cell. The
probability that n independent events of probability P occur is
Pn. In this Multi-Hit model, the probability of death decreases,
because “n” random hits must accumulate for one cell’s death:
Toxicity  (1  e  t D ) n
A semi-log graph of Toxic Dose (D) vs Toxicity is drawn for
n = 1 to 5 hits in F2.4.

targets (with accumulated hits), coupled with high toxicant
concentration. The multiple hit curves are functionally
equivalent to a low-dose detoxification mechanism. Note the
10-90 % spread in these curves.
1-Hit
21.9

Single-Hit and Multi-Hit Toxicity

When is the Multi-Hit model applicable ?
The inactivation of membrane receptors is an example, because
they are usually available in larger number than necessary.
Toxicity emerges at the toxicant concentration where the
remaining active receptor proteins are required for cell survival
or function.

0.9

Toxicity

0.8
0.7
1 Hit
2 Hit

0.5

3 Hit
4 Hit
5 Hit

0.4

10-Hit
1.91

When is the Single-Hit model applicable ?
The plant toxin ricin follows a retrograde transport route: from
cell surface to endosomes to the Golgi complex, to the
endoplasmic reticulum and finally the cytosol, where it binds to
and inactivates ribosomal RNA, thereby inhibiting protein
synthesis. A single ricin molecule entering the cytosol can
inactivate over 1,500 ribosomes per minute, and kill the cell.

1.0

0.6

T2.4a. 10-90 % Toxicity Spread
2-Hit
3-Hit
4-Hit
5-Hit
7.82
5.4
4.42
3.88

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.01

0.10

If absorbed in small enough quantities, most toxicants can be
neutralized by normal physiological mechanisms such as Phase
II metabolism (Chapter 3). This neutralization would shift the
dose-response curves to the right.

1.00

Toxic Dose

F2.4. Multi-Hits make dose-responses steeper.

The Single-Hit curve (blue) displays the condition “-dN/dD =
tN”, while the higher n-curves tend toward a threshold form.
Threshold dose-responses are frequently observed in
Toxicology. The 5-Hit curve’s shape results from the fact that
1 to 4 hits do not produce toxicity in the left part of the curve,
while in the right part, there is a relative richness of vulnerable

2.5.2. Toxicant to Receptor Binding
Increasing the stimulation on a physiological system generally
produces climbing curves that saturate at higher doses.
Equilibrium binding can be applied to toxicant-receptor
kinetics.
2-7

When toxicants interact with biological receptors, binding
follows the law of mass action. The equation below describes
the reversible binding of toxicant to receptor, quantified by
binding and dissociation constants (Kx).
Kbind

[toxicant   receptor ]
[toxicant ]  [receptor ] 


[toxicant   receptor ] 

In toxicity testing, we vary the dose (or toxicant concentration)
and measure toxic effects proportional to [toxicant  receptor],
the left side of the equation above. Both [receptor tot] and KM
are constants.
F2.5, created from the preceding equation, represents a binding
curve. If you plot the same data using a semilog layout (the Xaxis is log of dose), it becomes a soft sigmoid curve, as shown
in F2.6.
The 10-90 % spread in these curves is about 100, independent
of KM.
This curve is the expected form of toxicity relationships
between log of dose and continuous toxicity variables, if
compatible with simple receptor-ligand kinetics.

Kdiss

The rate of bound complex ( formation in moles/minute =
[toxicant] x [receptor] x Kbind. Consequently, the binding rate
constant Kbind is expressed in units of 1/(moles x min).
The rate of complex dissociation (+) is [toxicant   receptor] x
Kdiss. Consequently, the dissociation rate constant Kdiss is
expressed in units of 1/min.
At equilibrium, the dissociation reaction equals the binding
reaction, so
[toxicant ] [receptor ]  Kbind  [toxicant   receptor ]  Kdiss
or
K
[toxicant   receptor ]  [toxicant ]  [receptor ]  bind
K diss
Define the Michaelis-Menten constant, KM, equal to Kdiss/Kbind,
in moles units, which yields:
[toxicant ]  [receptor ]
[toxicant   receptor ] 
KM
Low values of KM indicate that the complex holds together
very tightly. Since all receptors are either free or bound, we
can express [receptor] as the total number of receptors minus
the number bound:
[receptor] = [receptortot] – [toxicant   receptor].
Substituting this definitions into the previous equation,
[toxicant   receptor ] 

[receptortot ]  [toxicant ]
K M  [toxicant ]

This new binding curve has a central range where the slope
changes relatively little, one practical reason for adoption of
these axes. An estimate of the amount of the toxicant that
produces a 50 % response is obtainable from the data points
that contribute to the estimation of this central slope.
Deviations from this form signal that more complex
phenomena contribute to toxicity.
Further, if we change the value of the Michaelis-Menten
constant (KM) in the binding equation by a factor of 100 each
way, identically shaped toxicity curves (F2.7) display
variations in potency. These curves could be perceived as
showing a threshold or not, depending on the range of dose
chosen for the experiment.
The value of the Michaelis-Menten constant, KM, represents
the speed of chemical reactions in general, and is known for
several enzymes (T2.4b).

[toxicant ]  ([receptortot ]  [toxicant   receptor ])
KM

which can be rearranged into the binding equation as:

2-8

If we wish to represent analytically changes in efficacy, the
term “+[toxicant]” in the binding equation can be modified by
addition of an factor corresponding to inclusion of two binding
steps as opposed to one, the two successive steps cascading to
contribute to a final expression of toxicity. The result is
illustrated in the lower curve of F2.8, showing that two binding
steps reduce the efficacy of the reaction.

F2.5. Binding Curve.
100
90
80

Toxicity

70

T2.4b. Michaelis-Menten constants, Km
Enzyme
Substrate
Km (Molar)
Catalase
H2O2
1.1
Chymotrypsin
Gly-Tyr-Gly
0.108
Carbonic anhydrase
CO2
0.012
d-Lactose
.004
 -Galactosidase
Acetylcholinesterase Acetylcholine (ACh)
0.00009
Benzylpenicillin
0.00002
 -Lactamase

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Dose

F2.6. Log scaling of a Binding Curve.
100
90
80

Toxicity

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.01

0.1

1

Log of Dose

2-9

10

100

2.5.3. Dose-Response of Complex Systems

F2.7. Changing KM alters Toxic Potency.
100
90
80

In laboratory tests, the toxicologist almost always prefers to
evaluate groups of animals or cells, basically because all
animals or cells do not behave identically. In epidemiology,
differences between human subjects lead to the determination
of probabilities, as opposed to certainties.
To protect toxicological results against individual variations, a
statistically significant sample of animals or cells is needed for
testing. This plurality of tests objects is almost universally
implemented, often according to budget limitations, even if no
a priori information is available on the variability of the
toxicity investigated.

Km = 0.01
Tight
Binding

Toxicity

70

Km = 1

60
50

Km = 100
Loose
Binding

40
30
20
10
0
0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

2.5.3.1. Central Limit Theorem

1000

To view how test-subject variations influence toxicological
results, we take a brief tour of simple statistics.
If one rolls one die repeatedly, the values 1,2,3,4,5,6 will come
out the same number of times, resulting in a flat histogram.

Log of Dose

100
90

F2.9. Distribution
generated by
rolling 5 dice.

80

Toxicity

70

http://www.stat.sc.edu/~
west/javahtml/CLT.html

60
50
Less efficant

40
30
20
10
0
0.01

0.1

1

10

100

Log of Dose

F2.8. Increasing number of binding steps reduces Efficacy.

2-10

However, as the number of dice increases, the distribution of
the total results assumes the shape in F2.9. Even if the
distribution for the individual die is flat, the sum of the
readings of 5 dice will show a most frequent value (18)
between the extremes (5 and 30), because there are fewer
solutions for extreme values of the roll (low=1,1,1,1,1 or
high=6,6,6,6,6) than there are for intermediate values.

The Central Tendency Theorem says that if we average
more and more independent random quantities that have a
common distribution (and if that common distribution is
not too pathological), then the distribution of their means
approaches a Gaussian.
Departures from this Gaussian (normal) probability distribution
suggests that special variables are strong determinants of
toxicity.
The variability within toxicant targets widens the spread of
dose-response curves with respect to those obtainable from the
simplest experimental systems.
Therefore, the physiology lab working on simple systems
should display narrower spreads than those observed in
epidemiology, or in groups of animals.
However, whether dealing with a continuous variable or
threshold expression of toxicity in a group, in the physiology
lab or in epidemiology, dose-responses are likely to display
similar shapes over a log scale.

Each of the 5 dice represents a variable which can have 6 toxic
sensitivity levels (1,2,3,4,5,6). All 5 variables (dice) contribute
to the subject’s overall toxicity dose-response (total score).
In order to obtain extreme values of toxicity sensitivity, either
low or high, all 5 variables must contribute extreme
characteristics, while more moderate thresholds can be
obtained using many more possible combinations of the
individual variables. The normal distribution that applies to the
dies (F2.9) also applies to integrated toxicity, if a sufficiently
large number of factors determine toxicity outcome.
If integrated toxicity is normally distributed with respect to
dose, few animals exhibit toxicity at extreme doses, while
many show toxicity at intermediate values (dose of 500, as
shown by the red line in F2.10).
If we are interested in the proportion of all animals that have
reached the toxic threshold at a given dose, we integrate the
red-line distribution (Gaussian) into the green curve (F2.10).
Further, if we graph the two previous curves over a log
abscissa, we obtain the Gaussian response graph in F2.11.
We note here that the green curve shows, as in the example of
the toxicant-receptor model (F2.6), a soft sigmoid curve with a
central range where the slope changes relatively little.

2-11

2.5.3.2. Probit Scale

An effort has been made to straighten completely the curve
obtained from randomly determined (Gaussian) toxicity
dependencies over dose. In this procedure, the proportion of
subjects responding to each dose is transformed using a
computed table into a number called a probit. The table is built
assuming that the experimental events are distributed exactly
according to a Gaussian. The graph of probit against log of
dose often produces points that are linear over a wide region of
dose in actual experiments (F2.12). The ideal probit plot is a
straight line, with a slope equal to 1/.

100
90
80

Toxicity

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

F2.12. A probit
curve.

Dose
F2.10. Gaussian toxicity distribution.

The processes of
linearization used
in toxicology
allow for easier
quantitative
assessment of
experimental
results, and also
facilitate the
detection of extraneous contributions within simple results, as
deviations from a straight line.

100
90
80

Toxicity

70
60
50
40
30
20

2.6. Dose-Response Examples

10
0
100

2.6.1. Example 1: Rat Ileum

1000
Log of Dose

F2.13 shows continuous dose-responses with administration of
various concentrations of two drugs in the guinea pig ileum.
These curves have a shape similar to the binding curves
displayed previously. The 10-90 % spreads are 79 and 100.

F2.11. Log scaling of Gaussian toxicity distribution.

2-12

2.6.2. Example 2: Cancer in Rats
One common task in toxicology is to assess what proportion of
test animals will show a response at various strengths of
exposure. In the determination of lethal doses, there are only
two outcomes: either the animal dies, or it lives (a quantal
response). Similarly, in cancer studies, either there is a tumor
or there is not. Cumulative curves similar to the ones in F2.13
can be documented for rat carcinogenicity.
2.6.3. Example 3: Anesthesia
Studying loss of righting reflex (“Effect”) and cessation of
breathing (“Toxicity”) in groups of 20 mice yielded the graphs
in F2.14. These curves are similar to the Gaussian response
curves displayed previously. The 10-90 % spreads are 1.8 and
4.
As might be expected, a number a parameters can be adjusted
within the mathematical expressions of the theoretical doseresponse characteristics displayed previously, to fit
experimental data. Observations cover the full range of 10-90
% spreads discussed theoretically in the earlier sections.

F2.13. Acetylcholine and propionycholine in the rat ileum.
F2.14. Loss of righting reflex (left) and cessation of breathing (right) in
groups of mice.

2.7. Hazard & Risk Assessment
2.7.1. Components of Risk Assessment
Some definitions…
The “HAZARD” produced by an agent is the injury that will
occur as a result of exposure.
A “RISK” combines the hazard with exposure, yielding a
probability that the injury will occur. For example, the
probability of dying in an aircraft crash (hazard) is one per 8
million flights (risk).
Risk Assessment is made of components often occurring in
succession.

2-13

Hazard Identification: the identification of known or potential
health effects associated with a particular agent.

A risk of 1 per Million is considered acceptable for bystanders and volunteers. This low risk is attributed because
they are considered to be unsuspecting and naïve potential
victims.

Hazard Quantification (Toxicology): the quantitative
evaluation of the hazards associated with an agent. The aim is
to collect all relevant human, animal and in vitro studies of
toxicity.
Abstracted databases such as Sax’s Dangerous Properties of
Industrial Materials can be invaluable in such work. From this
database, for each species, relationships between the dosage
administered (mg/kg/day, mg total dose, etc.) and the effects
produced can be developed in order to establish:

A risk of 1 in 100,000 is considered acceptable for general
patients receiving drugs, since they are expected to get a
benefit from the drugs they are using.
A risk of 1 in 10,000 is considered acceptable in workplace
safety, since the subjects earn a salary, are likely aware of the
exposure, and make the production of all goods possible.

the animal species or in vitro system most representative of
humans for the endpoints of toxicity retained, and
the dosage range and the shape (linear, convex, concave) of
the dose-response relationship.

A risk of 1 in 1,000 is considered acceptable for patients that
are victims of life-threatening diseases, since drug
administration may represent their only chance for survival.
Risk Quantification: integration of hazard and exposure
quantification into an estimation of the adverse effects likely to
occur in a given population, including data uncertainties.
A critical aspect is whether the dose-response relationship is:
threshold: there is a level below which toxicity (in
animals or humans) does not occur, or
non-threshold: there is always some toxicity, regardless
of how small the exposure is.
It is not uncommon that risks associated with certain agents
need to be updated due to new evidence or new analysis of old
evidence. One of the most powerful methods of manipulating
risk quantification is by expert assessment of publications,
establishing the relative credibility of specific studies (expert
assessment can be biased).

If the dosage range used in animal studies is different from that
encountered in exposed humans, there is need to extrapolate to
the human situation.
Exposure Quantification (Hygiene): determination, hopefully
by actual measurement, of the amount of the toxicant to which
individuals may be exposed. This will include air, water, soil,
food analysis, the nature and size of potentially exposed
populations, the duration of exposure (usually in the past), the
routes by which the agent might be acquired.
Risk Setting: One of the issues in risk assessment is how
acceptable risk levels are decided. There are standardized
levels of risk that attempt to balance the acceptable risk with a
particular situation.

For example, in 2007, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) amended the occupational standard of
2-14

exposure to hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) because workers
faced a significant risk of lung cancer, asthma, and damage to
the nasal epithelia and skin at the current exposure limits. The
new rule establishes an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA)
exposure limit of 5 µg/m3 of Cr(VI). The previous limit was
100 µg/m3 (a division by a factor of 20).
The new standard regulates separately general industry,
construction, and shipyards in order to tailor requirements to
the unique circumstances found in each of these sectors.
The new standard reduces the risk posed to workers to the
maximum extent that is technologically and economically
feasible.
Legal exposure limits reduce risks to levels that are
considered acceptable by the standards of the time.
For example, the old standard meant that a worker with a 45year maximum exposure to Cr(VI) had a cancer risk between
10 and 35 % (added to all other cancer risks), while the new
standard is expected to induce cancers at rates of 1 to 4.5 %

Risk Communication: Issues often occur in relation to
dissemination of toxicity information, or use of biased
information. If there is conflict, such as in a court case, all
background data is usually shared between parties as
documents are tabled. From the same information, the parties
then develop their interpretation, and attempt to sway the
tribunal in their favor.
If the controversy gets into the media, and it will, if it is
contentious, your interpretation of the potential hazard should
be presented rationally and convincingly.

Risk Decision: The weighing of policy alternatives to accept,
minimize or reduce risks, and to select and implement
appropriate options. Risk decision may involve, for example,
implementation of protective measures within an industrial
plant. If you are a member of a national committee, it may
involve settling for a value of the Threshold Limit Value.
For the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), who
assess the carcinogenic potential of agents based on the
"weight of evidence"1 approach, risk decision is the assignment
of an agent to a specific class (see Chapter 13).

1

Next page: F2.15. Types of Evidence used in Risk Assessment.

This is a decidedly, and perhaps deliberately, vague concept.

2-15

INCREASING SIGNIFICANCE TO PHYSIOLOGY (MECHANISMS)
INCREASING SIGNIFICANCE TO HUMAN HEALTH

Humans
(in populo)
METHOD

EXPOSURE
TOXICITY
TIME
FRAME
TYPICAL
TESTS

Animals
(in vivo)

Higher Cells
(in vitro)

Lower Cells
(in vitro)

Molecular Biology
(in vitro, in silico)

Particularly rodents,
because of their low
cost.

Human or mammalian
cells and tissues.

Lower unicellulars,
such as bacteria.

Molecular experiments
or computer
simulations.

Approximately
controlled.

Well controlled.

Well controlled.

Tightly controlled or
defined.

From cell function.

From cell function.

Inferred.

Up to a week.

Days.

Hours.

Cytotoxicity
(survival and
proliferation of cells).

Ames test for
genotoxicity.

Structure-Activity
Relationships.

Cross-sectional or
longitudinal studies of
prevalence or
incidence.
Sampled or estimated in
epi., approx. controlled
in clinical studies.
Human diseases.
From acute poisonings
up to lifelong (80 yrs
for cancer incidence).

Tumors, biopsies.
Up to lifelong (2 yrs) or
even longer in
reproductive studies.

Epidemiology and
Clinical studies.

Carcinogenicity study in
rats.

2-16

This means that below some concentration of exposure, no
toxic effect will be detected or detectable.
Having developed a dose-response relationship for an endpoint
of toxicity in the most susceptible species, what useful
quantities might be recovered from the relationship (F2.16)?

2.7.2. ”Strength of Evidence” Criteria
To confirm that associations are causal between agent tested
and the effect found, we use “Strength of Evidence” criteria.
Time: toxicity indexes should grow after exposure starts
(latency) and (generally) fall after exposure stops, in a timeframe compatible with toxicant elimination, or recovery from
toxicity.
Strength of toxic reaction: a strong toxic effect is less likely
than a weak one to be due to baseline noise in an animal model
or to uncontrolled factors (that also unwittingly influence the
toxic reaction studied). Therefore, a stronger reaction is less
likely to be artefactual than a smaller one.
Dose-response: finding a threshold, as well as a simple doseresponse, increases the chance that the data describes a toxic
reaction. While it is not necessary that the dose-response
follows a classic curve, data points along the dose curve should
support, rather than discredit each other.
Consistency: toxicities are most convincing when they can be
observed across species (despeciation), and when they can be
confirmed using many laboratory techniques or toxicity
indicators.
Plausibility: is there basic molecular knowledge that can
explain the toxicity data observed ? Is an alternate explanation
for the observations possible ?
Compatibility: are the new toxicity observations compatible
with existing knowledge, or do they leave us with an
incompatibility with the established databases ?

F2.16. Dose-response relationship with the parameters that may be
recovered from the curve: NOEL, NOAEL, LOAEL, ED50, Slope, FEL.

FEL: the frank effect level, where most of the individuals
demonstrate the anticipated toxic effect.
ED50: as in the acute toxicity studies, where the LD50 was
determined for lethality, this value gives the dose
hazardous to 50 % of the individuals. In cancer, this means
induction of tumors in 50 % of animals.
SLOPE of the dose-response relationship, indicating
whether a change in dosage produces a small or large
alteration in toxic effect.
LOAEL: Lowest Observable Adverse Effect Level, a
dosage that still causes some adverse health effect,
frequently being the lowest dosage administered in a 3-dose
experiment.

2.7.3. Threshold-Relationships
Most of the chemical-induced toxicities you will encounter fall
in the classification of “threshold relationships”. In those
toxicities, the detoxification term in Haber’s Law is not zero.

2-16

NOAEL: the No Observed Adverse Effect Level, the
dosage that may cause some changes in status (reduction in
body weight, organ function, etc.) but which are not
considered detrimental to general wellbeing. In many
cases, this may also be the lowest dosage administered in a
3-dose experiment.
NOEL: the no observed effect level - a dosage
administered that has no measurable effect on the test
individuals, the subjects looking and behaving (both
physiologically and biochemically) exactly like the
controls. This parameter is not easily obtained from studies,
the lowest dosage given usually producing a NOAEL or
LOAEL.

LOAEL, and may increase the magnitude of the Safety Factor
from 100- to 1000-fold.
This addresses the problem that the threshold observed
represents uncertain toxicity.
One may also use fractions, say 250 or 500 fold, depending
upon your assessment of the quality of the information
available. With any Safety Factor greater than 1000-fold, one
begins to suspect a flimsy database.
The result of the computation represents a Safe Human Dose,
an acceptable level of exposure or concentration via the normal
human absorption route.
Safe Human Doses are also labeled:

2.7.4. Safety Factors
Under the assumption of a threshold relationship for toxicity, a
low-toxicity level is quantified from experiments, yielding one
or more of the above parameters: NOEL, NOAEL or LOAEL,
in decreasing order of preference.
The low-toxicity level is then divided by a Safety Factor, often
chosen in multiples of 10. For example, a Safe Human Dose
may result from dividing the NOEL by a safety factor of 100.
Such a Safety Factor takes into consideration:

maximum allowable concentration (MAC),
reference dose (RfD),
virtually safe dose (VSD),
estimated population threshold for humans (EPT-H),
acceptable daily intake (ADI), or
tolerable daily intake (TDI).
A committee of the National Academies of Science pored over
50 years of data on survivors and descendents of survivors of
the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bomb attacks, as well as
accumulated data from dozens of studies on exposures to
workers in the nuclear industry and other high-exposure sites.
Their conclusion is that any exposure to natural or man-made
radiation, even at a very low level, carries a cancer risk. In the
past, the nuclear industry and some independent experts have
suggested that a safe low threshold for radiation exposure
exists. Even at the highest end of what experts consider lowdose lifetime exposure, 100 millisieverts, about 1 person in 100
would develop cancer. To put that number in context, 42 other

that the human may be up to 10-fold more sensitive than
the animal species in which the study was done (interspecies difference), and
that there may be a 10-fold range in sensitivity between the
very young, the adult and the elderly within any human
population (intra-species difference).
If a NOEL cannot be obtained from the dose-response
relationship, then the assessor may work with a NOAEL or
2-17

lifetime cases of cancer can be expected in that same
population of 100, due to such factors as smoking,
environmental toxins or other influences. The impact of such
conclusions related to one of the most tightly documented
agents, ionizing radiation, could have impacts on Toxicology
as a whole.

towards zero, to some conventional level of risk, such as
1/1,000,000 (or 1/100,000).
A more protective estimate can be obtained if one uses the
upper limit (+2 standard deviations) of the TD50 (point B). The
+2 value can be statistically determined from the
experimental data.
Assessors typically use two or more of these starting points,
obtaining multiple scenarios, and finally choosing among them
later on.
The use of linear models for the assessment of carcinogen
hazards arose from early work on radiation, where effects on
cells were expected to relate linearly to particle emissions
detected by Geiger counters (1940's - 1950's). This concept
was transferred in toto to mutagenic chemicals, which did not
emit anything, but could be shown to interact with nucleic
acids at relatively low concentrations.
Arguments rage even today around whether or not there is a
threshold level for carcinogens, but analysis has demonstrated
a non-linear, Gaussian (sigmoid-shaped) relationship between
radiation and biological effects.
It is easy to draw straight lines, but the exact relation between
dose and effect at low doses is usually a matter of speculation,
because of the lack of reliable experimental results. People and
assessors naturally get very nervous when they suspect that
they might be underestimating risks. To this end, complicated
and sophisticated models based on a variety of toxicological
assumptions have been developed.
The level retained as the reference point for risk calculation (A
or B) is then extrapolated to an acceptable risk of cancer,
arbitrarily established usually as 1 case/1,000,000 or 1
case/100,000 of population. Such a level would go undetected
by routine epidemiology, eliminating the scenario where
human deaths could be proven from anything but the most
sophisticated examination of health files. Furthermore,

2.7.5. Non-Threshold Relationships
When dealing with carcinogenicity, where one molecule of an
ultimate carcinogen could produce a cancer (Single-Hit), it is
often assumed that the dose-response relation is non-threshold.
This means that there is residual risk as long as there is any
exposure.

F2.17. Linear extrapolation methods from 50 % probability to
1/1,000,000 probability. From A, a line is drawn starting at the mean
value of TD50 towards a probability of 1/1,000,000. From B, a line is
drawn starting at the upper 95 % confidence limit of TD50.
A linear extrapolation does not show as a straight line on a linear-log
graph, and there is no zero on the “LOG. DOSAGE” scale.
Extrapolations could also be made from the TD10 levels.

In F2.17, one chooses a Threshold Dose point (point A) on the
dose-response curve (TD 50), and “linearly” extrapolates
2-18

experiments to reliably prove such low risks would be
prohibitively expensive.
If, for example, incidence of cancer rose by 10 % at a dose of 1
mg/kg/day, the Safe Human Dose would be 100 ng/kg/day,
assuming extrapolation to a risk of 1/100,000.

The non-threshold method, commonly applied to carcinogens,
provides a simple method of integration. The basic observation
in a non-threshold model is, for example, that 1 mg/day of
agent “A” produces a lifetime cancer rate of 1 in a million.

There has been a recent trend in the USA in particular to unify
cancer risk assessment with other risk assessment techniques,
resulting in a Unified Safe Human Dose approach for
carcinogens and non-carcinogens.
The proposed assessment may start from a NOAEL and apply
to this level 10x Safety Factors to a maximum of 10,000.

Environmental Limits vs Occupational Limits
The U.S. EPA, in seeking to protect general populations from
carcinogens, tolerates cancer rates of 1/1,000,000 to 1/10,000 for
most of their guidelines. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, in accomodating economic feasibility, puts
workers at much higher risk than EPA, as shown in the Table
below (highest EPA risk is 0.1/1000 workers).

Beyond the normal Safety Factors classically applied, such as:

Excess Cancers per 1000 workers at OSHA Permissible Exposure Level

need to extrapolate from animal tests to humans, and
existence of sensitive individuals,

Ethylene Oxide
Asbestos
Benzene
Formaldehyde
Methylenedianiline
Cadmium
1,3 Butadiene
Methylene Chloride
Chromium VI

the following factors are commonly considered:
exposure of children (Reproductive Toxicology),
limited availability of chronic data, and
any special “modifying factors”.
For cancer data, a 10 % excess of disease above baseline
determines the “Benchmark Dose” or "Effective Dose" at 10 %
(ED10). The Safe Human Dose for the carcinogen would be
obtained as LED10 / 10,000 or other safety factor. “L” in LED10
refers to a lower statistical limit (1 sigma) of the Effective
Dose.

1.2-2.3
6.7
10
0.0056-2.64
0.8
3-15
1.3-8.1
3.6
10.45

Most OSHA limits are to some extent obsolete, because of timeconsuming committee work, leading to inevitable discussions in
court.
This is a slope of 1/1,000,000 cancer-day/mg. If agent “B” is
added with a similar risk, the cancer rates can simply be added
to 2/1,000,000 cancer-day/mg:
Integrated Risk   Di  Slope of Carcinogenicity Curvei

2.7.6. Integration of Multiple Exposures
Philosophical differences between risk assessment methods
become apparent when integrating effects of multiple agents.

i

2-19

For threshold risk assessment, the integration is more vague
because the concepts relate to the “Safe Dose”, as opposed to a
specific disease rate. When combining the effects of two or
more agents, we obtain a compounded “Risk Ratio”, which
sums the ratios between actual doses of agents (Di) and doses
considered “safe”.
Di
Risk Ratio  
i Safe Dosei
“Safe” is an absolute and elusive concept, not a measured
disease rate.
Both of the integrations above assume no interactions between
the individual agents.

“When an activity raises threats of harm to human
health or the environment, precautionary measures
should be taken even if some cause and effect
relationships are not fully established scientifically.”
In effect, the Precautionary Principle shifts the burden of proof
away from the protection advocates and towards industry. It
also dictates the approach when evidence is lacking or is
inconclusive.
The Precautionary Principle might have effects soon in
influencing the inclusion of new chemicals on the UN’s list of
Persistent Organic Polluants (POPs). The list presently includes
12 polluants: dioxins and furans, PCBs, aldrin, chlordane,
DDT, dieldrin, endrin, heptachlor, hexachlorobenzene, mirex
and toxaphene.

2.7.7. Precautionary Principle
A major difficulty in risk management is the public’s
unwillingness to accept a low (estimated “safe”) level of
carcinogens in air, water, food, etc. At one extreme, the public
requires zero risk, an impossibility in this day and age, when
our analytical capabilities can measure minute (ppt, ppq)
amounts of contaminants. In the public's psychology, if the
agent has a concentration number, it should not be there, no
matter how small the number may be.
Such an attitude is difficult to reconcile with technological
feasibility. However, the notion that risks attendant to various
agents are discovered by science after exposure has occurred is
very strong in the public’s eye, and partly justified. The final
experiment is that of human exposure…

2.7.8. Hazards of Risk Assessment
2.7.8.1. Toxicology vs Risk Assessment

The procedures of toxicology, with standardized tests and
hopefully careful inferences, are perceived as more scientific
than the deliberations of Risk Assessment. Hazard & Risk
Assessment4 is a semi-scientific process usually involving
many segments of society, and leading to decisions.
2.7.8.2. Objectivity in Risk Assessment

Weaknesses inherent in Risk Assessment techniques, for
example
(1) dealing with incomplete data,
(2) focussing on specific sets of data,
(3) the choice of Safety Factors and statistical methods,
(4) relying on status quo (previous decisions or traditions),

Various philosophies are used in risk management, but one that
has gained favor, particularly in the European Union (it is
already law in Germany and Sweden), is the precautionary
principle, also known as prudent avoidance.

2-20

underlie its vulnerability to politics, making exposure to
toxicants a matter of choice.

Many polemists represent these conflicts as a contest between
financial interests (money) and human health.
Managers and politicians may place public interest
behind self-interest

1 - The lack of information creates opportunity for individuals
to devise models, even quantitative models, that are susceptible
to political influence.
As incomplete science meets a demand for decisions,
small segments of science can be given too much importance.

But “money” concerns are sometimes legitimate. Although we
need to protect human health, the efforts that we marshal to
protect it should not create more grief than the problems we are
trying to solve. To strike a balance, objectivity is necessary, or
perhaps more accurately, adoption of a point of view that
balances the interests of everyone.
The cost of safety vs the desire for zero risk.

All scientific work is incomplete-whether it be observational or
experimental. All scientific work is liable to be upset or
modified by advancing knowledge. That does not confer upon
us a freedom to ignore the knowledge we already have, or to
postpone the action that it appears to demand at a given time.
(Bradford Hill)

Gold standards of objectivity are hard to attain in difficult
questions. In the distant past, objectivity was thought to issue
from social position or high education. Today, the need for
impartiality incites the use of more resources (committees) and
technical means such as statistics (vs vague statements) and
images (vs drawing or recounts) to enhance credibility.

2 - Toxicity evidence may sometimes appear incoherent.
Restoring coherence can be done by arbitrarily weighing the
importance of data, giving more credibility to some, less to
others, while still ignoring others entirely. The choices may
depend on how hazards and risks are perceived.
Selection of scientific data can be used to support hidden
economic and political agendas.

Quantitative methods
help, but they must be
used adequately to
produce the best
results.

3 - The choice of quantitative technique, for example threshold
vs non-threshold dose-response, can have a serious impact on
the level of protection.
Statistics is an excellent servant and a bad master.

F2.18. From the June,
1947 issue of Time.

4 - Canada has viewed asbestos as a natural resource for
decades, and is still exporting large amounts of asbestos to
poor countries in Asia.
The recipients of profits have little incentive to objectively
examine their products for adverse health consequences.

2.7.8.3. Example 1: DDT

Dichloro-diphenyl-trichloro-ethane (DDT) was used
extensively in the period from 1940 to 1960 to control insect
populations. It was cheap, effective, persistent in the
2-21

environment and made a significant dent in the world incidence
of malaria. It was applied in large quantities to cotton crops.
But western public mood changed when unexpected
environmental toxicities were found. Some concerned the
fragilization of the eggs of wild birds, particularly the bald
eagle, a sensitive subject in the US, where DDT was banned in
1971. Today, DDT is still surrounded in controversy,
particularly because developing countries have not found
inexpensive substitutes.
Whether DDT is acceptable could be decided using mountains
of specific toxicity data. But the matter is even more easily
settled depending on whether your country is currently infested
by mosquitoes and malaria. There are at least 300 million acute
cases of malaria each year, with more than a million deaths.

These two examples show that the use of a chemical usually
has both positive and negative impacts. The balance between
them can be compiled by a procedure of Hazard and Risk
Assessment.
2.7.8.5. Factors Influencing Risk Assessment

The determination of how objectionable a given risk is depends
on a number of factors, many intimately related to human fear:
Is the injury heritable ?
Is the injury permanent ?
How debilitating is the injury ?
Does a hypersensitive population exist ?
Is the presence of risk recognized by the subjects
(environmental vs occupational) ?
Can exposure be avoided ?
Are only a few individuals exposed, or is everyone ?
Is the source natural or industrial ?
Is the source controllable ?
Is the source familiar ?
Is the risk larger than other familiar risks ?
Are there alternatives to the agent ?
Is there a high potential for misuse ?

2.7.8.4. Example 2: Thimerosal

Thimerosal, which contains
ethyl mercury, has been
used to prevent bacterial
contamination in vaccine
vials over the last 50 years, apparently with a
“good safety record”.
Work is going on to eliminate thimerosal from vaccines, in an
effort to minimize exposure to mercury, particularly in children
(see the document DVD:\Thimerosal Debate.pdf).
Thimerosal prevents the conversion of dietary forms of vitamin
B12 into the active form. This blocks methionine synthase,
which interferes with DNA methylation (an epi-genetic control
mechanism).
Whether thimerosal is acceptable depends on the availability of
refrigeration for the conservation of vaccines, or on whether
the cost of individual vials, as opposed to large multi-dose
vials, is acceptable.

2.7.8.6. Manipulation of Risk Assessment

Biases in Risk assessment can result from improper scientific
techniques. Here are a few examples.
The investigative power of a study can be limited by using
groups too small for the level of risk expected, insuring that
the conclusions will have no statistical significance
A study can be too short to see the full development of
disease incidence.
The selection subjects or the exposure systems can be poor
so as to include non-exposed among the exposed, or
2-22

incorporating large uncertainty margins in the exposure,
weakening the potency of the study
Alter routes of exposure that do not affect targets as
strongly as they should
Perform histology on samples not well preserved, so that
effects of agents become undetectable

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) quickly followed the precedent of the
FDA and issued notice that CE was a candidate for denial of renewed registration
on the basis of its possible carcinogenicity.
The OSHA guidelines now limit air concentrations of CE in areas where employees
work to 100 ppm (500 mg/m3) during an eight-hour time-weighted average period.
The NIOSH (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health) guidelines,
however, recommend that no occupational exposure to halogenated anesthetic
agents be greater than 2 ppm (10 mg/m3) for a one-hour sampling period.

2.7.9. An Example of Risk Assessment

2.7.9.2. Animal Metabolism and Kinetics
Absorption. CE is readily absorbed by all routes of exposure, as would be predicted
by its physical and chemical properties. Its historical use as an anesthetic indicates
its rapid rate and high percent of absorption via inhalation. Measurements taken
after oral administration of CE to rats indicate that at least 80 percent is absorbed
from the GI tract.

(modified from Williams & Burson)
This example sets a drinking-water standard for “chlorinated ethylene”, designating
a group of compounds for which hypothetical but realistic data, largely derived from
perchloroethylene, are used. It illustrates how various Safe Human Doses can be
derived, according to different assumptions or data sources. The various SHD values
(mg/day) obtained are highlighted in red. Emphasis was added to various parts of the
text by your professor.

Elimination. The elimination of CE in mammals is fairly rapid. After inhalation of
CE at 300 ppm for 8 hr, CE was undetectable in the expired air of rats in one study.
However, another study indicated approximately 80 percent would be eliminated via
the lungs. The estimated half-life for CE for most tissues is about 100 min, while for
fat tissues the half-life is 200 min. Thus, eight hours after administration some 95
percent of the CE absorbed should be eliminated.

2.7.9.1. Introduction and Historical Perspectives
Chlorinated ethylene (CE), a volatile compound, is used as a degreaser for
machinery and as a solvent for organic products. CE has been used in consumer
products such as glues, rug cleaners, as a propellant for aerosol products, and as an
extraction solvent for decaffeinated coffee prior to the late 1970s. Near that time, the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prohibited its use as a direct or indirect food
additive because of suspicions that CE was a carcinogen. Prior to the FDA ban, CE
was measured in foods:
ITEM
ppm
Dairy products
1-10
Meat
10-20
Oils and fats
1-19
Hot beverages
160
Mollusks
0-0.250
Fish
0-0.48

Metabolism. Much of the early toxicity research with CE was thought to support
the idea that metabolism generated a reactive metabolite, probably the epoxide form,
which was hepatotoxic and possibly capable of binding DNA and initiating cancer.
However, recent work has changed much of the current thought on CE metabolism
by demonstrating that the alcohol metabolite is not dependent upon nor derived from
the epoxide metabolite form. This in turn suggests that species differences in
hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity are not related to species differences in the
conversion rate of the epoxide to the less reactive alcohol metabolite. In addition, it
has been shown that covalent protein binding of CE intermediates does not correlate
with the formation of the epoxide metabolite. However, research has demonstrated
that species differences do exist for covalent binding of reactive metabolites in rats
and mice and that these differences in covalent binding parallel the different
carcinogenic responses observed in these species.

Besides food sources, it was estimated that some 5000 medical, dental, and hospital
personnel were exposed to CE and that about 60,000 additional persons were
subjected to it annually when it was used as an anesthetic in medical situations.
Concentrations in hospital rooms ranged from 0.3 to 103 ppm.
Based on its widespread use and occurrence in our environment, it is not surprising
that levels of 1-32 ppb were reported post-mortem in human tissues.
The FDA therefore also moved against any medical uses and banned all anesthetics
containing CE. Furthermore, CE was disallowed in cosmetic products, animal and
pet foods, animal drug products, and as an oil-extraction solvent for seed products.

Mechanistic Differences between Species. Interestingly, human microsomes form
DNA adducts at a low rate similar to that found in the noncarcinogenic model,
Osborne-Mendel rats. Both rats and humans appear to have substantially lower rates
of microsomally generated DNA-adduct formation when compared to the B6C3F1
mouse, a species that is positive for liver cancer after chronic CE exposure.
Researchers have also reported a species difference in microsomally generated
covalent protein binding, which was likewise consistent with the results from the
carcinogenicity tests. A sex difference in covalent binding in the B6C3Fl mouse has

2-23

also been demonstrated which is consistent with the higher liver cancer incidence
observed in male mice.

gestation. In this study the indices monitored for adverse effects were the number of
implantations, litter size, incidence of resorptions, fetal sex ratios, fetal body
measurements, and morphologic anomalies. It was concluded that CE was not
significantly maternally toxic, embryotoxic, fetotoxic, nor teratogenic in this study.
Another study has reported that male mice exposed to 2000 ppm (0.2 percent in air)
for 4 hr/day for 5 days had 2.4 percent abnormal spermatozoa compared to a 1.4
percent abnormal sperm count in controls. While this was a statistically significant
difference, no change was observed at the 200 ppm exposure and the relevance of
the 2000 ppm exposure in mice to expected human exposures, if any, is minimal.

Differences between Rats and Mice. Observations of rats versus mice show
differences in metabolism, both quantitative and qualitative. It has been found that
the B6C3F1 mouse metabolized CE to a greater extent and generated even more
macromolecular binding than expected when compared to the Osborne-Mendel rat.
Also noted in the mouse was a lack of DNA alkylation , an increased hepatotoxicity,
and an increase in DNA synthesis. This led to the proposal that CE was probably not
initiating liver cancer in the mice through alkylation of DNA, but was increasing
tumor formation through a recurrent injury (i.e., a cytotoxic type of mechanism).
The importance of this proposed mechanism is that chronic, hepatotoxic doses
would be required to induce cancer in any species.

Mutagenicity. CE has been reported as weakly positive or positive in only a few
mutagenicity tests, but negative in a number of others. The role that might have been
played by contaminants in some of the positive tests has been suggested, but not
proved. Therefore, evidence of the mutagenic potential of CE is considered to be
inconclusive and confounded by the presence of mutagenic contaminants in a
number of studies using the technical grade compound. Pure CE is apparently not
mutagenic.

Acute and Chronic Toxicities of CE. The acute and chronic toxicities of CE have
been adequately summarized in a number of reviews and the data used here are
drawn largely from them. The acute lethal effects (LD50) of CE occur at moderately
high concentrations (g/kg):
Oral in Rats
Oral in Dogs
Intraperitoneal Injections in Mice
Intraperitoneal Injections in Dogs

Carcinogenicity. The National Cancer Institute published results of its bioassay in
1978. B6C3Fl mice had been administered CE 5 days/week for 78 weeks. The
results are in the table below.

5-7
6
3
2.8

Hepatocellular Carcinoma Rates among Mice, according to Dose
Male
Female
1.2 g/kg day
2.4 g/kg day
0.9 g/kg day
1.8 g/kg day
26/50
31/48
4/50
11/49
In control animals the rate was 1/40 when both sexes were combined.

The NOAEL vapor concentrations after 7 hr/day, for 5 days/week, for 6 months are:
 
 
 

100 ppm (0.5 g/m3) in guinea pigs.
200 ppm (1 g/m3) in rats and rabbits.
400 ppm (2 g/m3) in monkeys.

In Osborne-Mendel rats exposed to doses of either 0.6 or 1.2 g/kg day, no liver cell
tumors occurred and there was no statistically significant increase for any other type
of tumor. The rat data are complicated somewhat by the poor survival of all groups
during the course of this particular bioassay. Likewise. the positive result in the
B6C3FI mouse is somewhat undermined by the fact that about 0.3 percent of the CE
consisted of the mutagenic contaminants common to technical grade preparations.
Subsequent studies in these strains of rodents yielded essentially the same results.

Likewise, 30 exposures each of 8-hr duration to 700 ppm (3.5 g/m3) or continuous
exposure to 200 mg/m3 for 90 days produced no visible signs of toxicity in rats.
dogs, monkeys, guinea pigs, or rabbits.
Like other chlorinated aliphatics, when administered at acutely toxic levels CE is
principally a central nervous system depressant. It also produces some liver and
kidney damage, but at doses far higher than those at which carbon tetrachloride
produces similar damage. In rodents, liver injury occurs after a single dose at about
2 g/kg. CE, like many chlorinated solvents, may sensitize the heart to epinephrine
such that stress or excitement may produce cardiac arrhythmias.

An inhalation study performed by an independent laboratory reported that CE again
produced positive results in the B6C3F1 mouse but was not carcinogenic in the
Osborne-Mendel rat. A third study using rats also yielded negative results. Dermal
and oral administration of CE to ICR/Ha Swiss mice has also yielded negative
results. Finally, no increased incidence of tumors was found with an 18-month
inhalation exposure to 100 ppm (500 mg/m3) or 500 ppm (2.5 g/m3) of nonepoxidestabilized CE in hamsters, rats, and mice. Thus, even when using technical grade CE
with mutagenic contaminants present, CE was found to be positive in only one strain
of mice.

Teratogenicity and Reproductive Toxicity. CE produced no teratogenic effects in
either rats or mice exposed for 7 hr/day at 300 ppm (1.5 g/m3) on days 6-15 of


A radical with the general formula CnH2n+1 such as methyl, ethyl…

2-24

2.7.9.3. Summary of the Toxicology of CE in Humans

AF = absorption factor, the percentage of the dose absorbed via the designated route
of exposure in the animal species divided by the percentage of the dose absorbed by
humans via the designated expected route;
ER = exposure ratio, the dosage regimen (i.e., rate of exposure) in the animal species
divided by the anticipated exposure in humans;
t½ = a ratio of the elimination half-life in the animal species to the elimination halflife for humans;
SF = a safety factor included to dampen individual variability in responses to
chemicals; SF depends upon the reliability of the database used for the
extrapolation. A value of 10, 100, or 1000 is selected as shown below:

The acute toxicity of CE in humans is remarkably similar to that observed in animals
and will not be discussed here for the sake of brevity.
Chronic Toxicity Produced in Humans. Of two epidemiologic studies examining
the cancer mortality in occupationally exposed persons, one study reported a lowerthan-expected total mortality (49 versus 62) and cancer mortality (11 versus 14.5)
for 600 male workers exposed to 50 ppm of CE. The other study reported a cohort of
2117 CE-exposed workers. Again, both total mortality and cancer mortality were
lower than expected based on rates established for the general population. Out of
these two studies some 1050 workers could be identified who had been exposed to
CE for at least 15 years at an exposure level of about 50 ppm or greater.

10 = When the extrapolation is derived from a good database of
human origin and there exists a substantial animal data base.
100 = Human data are scanty. inconclusive, or absent; long-term,
reliable animal data are available. No long-term human data
are available; animal data are scanty, or interspecies
sensitivity varies greatly.

2.7.9.4. Extrapolation of the Animal and Human Data
Both threshold and non-threshold models might be considered for the animal
data. Since a significant human database is available, risk estimates can be generated
from these data as well, and then used in comparison with the animal extrapolations
and as a guideline for final recommendations.
For non-cancer toxicity, or threshold situations, models for extrapolating to no risk
are reasonably straightforward and basically are similar to the suggested no-adverseresponse level (SNARL) developed by the National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences or the no-observable-effect limit (NOEL) of the
EPA. Calculations are applied that make the conversion from a no-effect level in
animals to a safe upper limit of exposure to humans (i.e., the human threshold
dose). The conversion must also take into consideration such factors influencing
species response as absorption, metabolism, and excretion. Finally, a safety or
uncertainty factor is applied, which is derived from an evaluation of the extent,
reliability, reproducibility, and interspecies variability of the available data from
animal and, when available, human studies.

The BW factor is given a value of 1.0 rather than 70 because it is assumed that for
an inhalation exposure at steady state the concentrations in critical tissues will be
similar for all species and there will be no size adjustment needed.
The AF is assumed to be 0.70 even though this value is probably similar for all
species and would therefore be 1.0 when making animal-to-man comparisons. It is
included as 0.70 in order to provide an additional margin of safety in this
calculation.
The ER is 1.0 in as much as exposure situations are set to be the same in animals
and humans.
The ratio t½ is assumed to be 1.0.
The SF is set at 100 and is derived from a factor of 10 because good human data
exist that suggest a ThD of 35 ppm does not lead to chronic illness in humans, but
since chronic animal data were not utilized, and as the actual ratio for t1/2 cannot be
calculated because the human half-life is not known, a second factor of 10 is
included to insure safety for a heterogeneous human population.
Thus, substituting in the equation:
ADI air continuous exposure = 35 ppm x 1.0 x 0.7 x 1.0 x 1.0
100

2.7.9.5. Safe Human Dose Threshold Model using
Non-cancer Animal Data
A review of the animal data on CE toxicity listed earlier, shows that the best
estimate for an animal-derived no-observable-effect level (TD0) is 35 ppm. This can
then be used as a threshold dose in a risk assessment formula for human exposure to
CE. The particular formula we will use here is
ADI =

or, ADI = 0.245 ppm in air, or 1.225 mg/m3.

ThD x BW x AF x ER x t½
SF

To convert this value to a safe water concentration it is assumed that a 70-kg man
will inhale about 24 m3 of air per day and consume 2 liters of water per day. Thus
the ADI becomes

ADI = acceptable daily intake;
ThD = the threshold dose for which no observable effect was produced in the animal
species;
BW = body weight of human (average assumed to be 70 kg);

3
3
3
ADI water = ADIair x 24 m = (1.225 mg/m )(24 m ) = 14.7 mg/l = 14.7 ppm.
2 1/day
2 1/day

2-25

If the acceptable risk (R) is set at 10-5 or 1/100,000, and if we use the lowest positive
dose for male mice from the NCI cancer bioassay data and the upper bound of the 95
percent confidence interval (0.50), the safe human dose can be calculated as

This means a daily intake of ~ 30 mg/day.

2.7.9.6. Safe Human Dose Threshold Model using
Non-cancer Human Data

SHD =

= 0.024 mg/kg.day.
0.50
Extrapolating to a 70-kg man, and assuming a human lifetime exposure of 70 years
versus 2 years for a rat, the safe human daily intake (ADI) becomes:

This second approach uses human data. An Estimated Permissible Concentration
(EPC) can be calculated by using safe occupational air concentrations as a guideline.
Essentially, the EPC for air is calculated by converting the amount of CE a worker
theoretically can be exposed to safely during a 40-hr week to the same total amount
of CE but derived from a continuous daily air exposure (i.e., 40 hr/168 hr per week).
A safety factor of 100 is recommended in calculating an EPC. The EPC for water is
then derived by applying the same conversion as was made for the ADI calculation
in the preceding section.
The occupational threshold limit value (TLV) for CE is 100 ppm (500 mg/rn 3) for an
8-hr shift; thus the EPC for air is calculated to be:

ADI =

(24 µg/kg.day) (70 kg) = 48 µg/day.
35

If humans are assumed to consume 2 liters of water per day, then the acceptable
water concentration, based on animal data for the extrapolation purposes, is:

Water Concentration Limit (2 l/day) = 24 µg/1 or 24 ppb.

EPCair = (500 mg/m3)(40/168) = 1.19 mg/m3.
100

2.7.9.8. Safe Human Dose Non-Threshold Model
using Cancer Human Data

Using the same extrapolation as before to convert safe air exposures to safe
drinking-water exposures we get

In the case of CE, the human data do not show an observable increase in the cancer
rate. But using “0” in calculations is not practical. Statistically, the 99 percent upper
confidence interval for a test population of 1000 individuals is 0.45 percent.
That is, the actual cancer rate could be as high as 0.45 percent (0.0045) or 4.5/1000
persons exposed and, statistically, once in a hundred times, it will be mistakenly
identified as zero.
Assuming this worst case when no cancer risk is detected in 1000 exposed
individuals, the actual undetected risk could be as high as 4.5 x 10-3.
There exist two epidemiologic studies based on occupational exposures for CE. In
both, the total mortality and cancer mortality were less than expected, so the risk
observed can be considered to be zero. If we combine the populations from both
studies, which had approximately the same CE exposures, we may make the
following assumptions and calculations:

EPCwater =(1.19 mg/m3)(24 m3) = 14.3 mg/l = 14.3 ppm.
2 1/day
Note that the techniques used to extrapolate risk from the animal and human data
produce very similar values.

2.7.9.7. Safe Human Dose Non-Threshold Model
using Cancer Animal Data
For the nonthreshold (i.e., cancer) risk estimates, several different models can be
chosen and each will derive a slightly different number. The linear interpolation
model proposed by Gaylor is selected here because it probably represents the most
conservative approach and essentially derives the upper bound of the risk estimates
that would be arrived at in other ways in other models. The formula for deriving the
risk estimate is

SHD 

(10-5) (1200 mg/kg.day)

 
There were 1050 persons exposed to about 50 ppm in an
occupational setting.
 
The average daily exposure was 1.4 g/day (about 2.0 g/day for a
5-day work-week; conversion to a 7-day week will need to be made for daily
environmental exposure).
 
The 99 percent upper confidence limit on the risk for this
population is approximately 4.5/1000 or 4.5 x 10-3.
 
It was assumed that the average exposure interval was only 15
years; thus, this estimate will need to be converted to a lifetime of 70-yrs.

Rd e
UCL

where
R = the conventional acceptable probability that cancer will occur;
de = the experimental dose chosen as reference in the animal studies;
UCL = the upper confidence limit cancer incidence observed at the reference;
SHD = the safe human dose.

2-26

 
The ADI is contained in 2 liters of water, which is the amount of
liquid a person consumes each day.

addition, a ranking of CE using the system proposed by R. A. Squire indicates that
CE would score approximately 31 points, which is equivalent to the score for
saccharin. This score suggests that CE is not a likely human carcinogen, especially
at low doses. Epidemiologic evidence, while perhaps not yet of sufficient strength to
eliminate all concern for the carcinogenic potential of CE, indicates that even for the
worst possible case it is a relatively weak human carcinogen. Thus, there is much
evidence to suggest the values in the preceding table are adequate for the protection
of health in the circumstances of chronic ingestion of CE and would adequately
protect human health from all adverse effects. However. cancer data were also
considered so as to calculate levels in the event that additional evidence better
defining the carcinogenicity of CE is produced.
The values for the estimated safe water concentration, based on carcinogenic
potential, are listed below.

Since the risk for the 1050 persons exposed to 50 ppm of CE is equivalent to
4.5 x 10-3 = 1.428 g/day, a 10-3 risk will be
1428

= 317 mg/day

4.5
Since the 10-3 risk = 317 mg/day after only 15 years of exposure to CE, a 10 -3 risk
for a lifetime exposure (70 yr), given the same dose, would be
317 mg/day x (15/70) = 70 mg/day;

Possible water Standards, using non-threshold model:

and a 10-5 risk, with daily exposure for a lifetime, would be 700 µg/day. Therefore,
assuming 2 1 are consumed per day, the safe water concentration for a 10 -5 risk
estimate is 350 µg/l (or ppb) if human epidemiologic data are used for extrapolation
purposes.
Note that our hypothetical risk has been calculated from a substantial body of
negative data by making worst-case assumptions that reflect the actual data. A
hypothetical risk has therefore been calculated to help set an exposure guideline
even though no such risk has been identified in humans.

10-5 Risk
1.
2.

2.7.9.9. Recommended Groundwater Standard

Safety factor of 100
14.7 mg/l
14.3 mg/l

10-7 Risk

Estimates derived from
animal data

24.0 µg/l

2.40 µg/1

0.24 µg/1

Estimates derived from
human data

350 µg/l

35 µg/1

35 µg/l

In both of the tables of extrapolated standards, the risk estimates generated from the
animal data can be considered reasonably conservative estimates. Gaylor's model
has been applied to the second table. which is based on the assumption that CE is
carcinogenic; the animal data in that table were considered to give a worst-case
estimate of the carcinogenic potential of CE. That estimate was then tested for its
relevance to the human situation by extrapolating to, and identifying for comparison,
the exposures that would be predicted to produce measurable cancer rates in humans
if the base estimates of risk were correct. This test of the data is an upward linear
extrapolation from the dose representing the 10-5 risk estimate. When this is done.
the additional increase in cancer for persons occupationally exposed should be about
17 percent for an exposure, over a 15-yr work interval, to 50 ppm of CE. This
incidence is very high and would have been observed in the two actual
epidemiologic studies that were made of workers with similar exposure levels and
exposure intervals. It can be concluded then that the risk estimates generated here
from the animal data do overestimate the human risk. A similar test of the
extrapolation made from the human data in the two actual epidemiologic studies
cannot, of course, be done, but the true risk of CE exposure can be no worse than the
estimate derived from the human data in which a cancer incidence was assumed for
negative data. Therefore, if it is assumed on the basis of the animal data that CE
might carry some carcinogenic potential and risk, a final standard for groundwater
could be reasonably chosen as that value corresponding to a previously determined
"acceptable risk" level (i.e., 10-5, 10-6, or 10-7) using the extrapolation of the human
epidemiologic data.

Possible water Standards, using threshold model:
1. Threshold derived from animal data
2. Threshold derived from human data

10-6 Risk

Safety factor of 1000
1.47 mg/l
1.43 mg/l

The values are very similar; the similarity stems from coincidental use of nearly
equivalent inhalation levels obtained from animal experiments and time-established
human occupational guidelines. These rather high values for the CE content of water
reflect the fact that CE is not a potent toxicant at acute exposures. The few studies
that reflect its noncancerous chronic toxicity likewise suggest that it is a relatively
unremarkable toxicant at other than high concentrations. As was seen earlier, while
there is animal evidence demonstrating that CE increases the tumor incidence in the
B6C3F1 mouse, these studies are mitigated by the fact that CE is not carcinogenic in
the rat, or hamster, or in another strain of mice. The positive studies are also
confounded by the fact that contaminants in technical-grade CE are mutagenic and
may have contributed significantly to the response observed in the susceptible
mouse.
Studies comparing metabolic and biochemical differences between susceptible and
nonsusceptible species for CE-induced oncogenicity suggest that the susceptible
strain of mouse is not a relevant animal model for predicting human risks. In

2-27

2.7.9.10. Summary of the Estimates of Risk

Such a disparity between standards or recommendations for federal regulatory
agencies is common today, because each agency assesses and manages risk by a
different process.

It is recognized that risk management is a process in which environmental standards
should reflect a variety of important considerations when they are established for
contaminant levels in potential human exposure sources such as water. Of primary
importance is the protection of human health Once this criterion is satisfied a
regulatory standard may reflect other societal concerns as well. For example, while
it could be argued that 1 mg/l might adequately protect human health from CE
exposure, if subsequent human or animal studies removed concerns for its
carcinogenic potential, the value chosen for a standard might be lower and reflect
society's desire for a chemical-free drinking water source. For comparative purposes
the EPA has established federal primary drinking water standards for a number of
chlorinated organic solvents and chlorinated pesticides. These standards range from
the 1-ppb to the 100-ppb level. Since the 10-5-risk estimates calculated from the
animal and human data for our example are reasonably conservative, and generally
bracket this range, the state might argue to set the standard somewhere between 100
and 350 ppb. Such a standard should reasonably and safely protect human health
within the limits of the uncertainty that are inherent in the database and the models
used to calculate the values from it. It would also be in keeping with the intent of the
EPA and the guidelines proposed by that agency for other chlorinated aliphatics.
Reiterating that much data are available to greatly lessen concern for the human
cancer risk posed by CE, a state Division of Environmental Resources might
reasonably select the cancer-risk estimate for a drinking-water standard as high as
350 ppb and at the same time choose to adopt the threshold-derived values in the 12-ppm range as a reasonably safe guideline to protect aquatic life and human health
under short-term unexpected situations such as spills into rivers acting as drinkingwater supplies.
It is hoped that the reader will appreciate the fact that should the state finally pick
either level as a standard, various interest groups could argue against one or the
other of them by reasoning either that
(1) risk of carcinogenic potential must be assumed until better and more definitive
evidence proves there is none, or
(2) since the animal and human data indicate no cancer risk, the higher value is safe
because apparently-safe occupational exposures are far higher.

REFERENCES
1. Biological gradient between long-term arsenic exposure and carotid atherosclerosis. Wang, C.-H. et al. Circulation 105,
p.1804, 2002.
2. The Basis of Toxicity Testing, Ecobichon, D.J. 2nd edition, CRC Press, 1997, Ch. 1.
3. Arsenic Alters the Function of the Glucocorticoid Receptor as a Transcription Factor. Ronald C. Kaltreider, Alisa M.
Davis, Jean P. Lariviere, and Joshua W. Hamilton. Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume 109, Number 3 March 2001.
4. Acute thermal hyperalgesia elicited by low-dose morphine in normal mice is blocked by ultra-low-dose naltrexone,
unmasking potent opioid analgesia. Crain, S.M., and K.-F. Shen. Brain Research 888, January:75. 2001.
5. Hormonal Chaos: the Scientific and Social Origins of the Environmental Endocrine Hypothesis. Krimsky, S. Johns
Hopkins, 2000, 284 p.
6. Identification of phthalate esters in the serum of young Puerto Rican girls with premature breast development. Colon
I. Caro D. Bourdony CJ. Rosario OEnvironmental Health Perspectives. 108(9):895-900, Sep 2000.
7. Induction of Calcium-Ion Efflux from Brain Tissue by Radiofrequency Radiation: Effects of Modulation Frequency
and Field Strength. Blackman CF, Elder JA, Weil CM, Benane SG, Eichinger DC, House DE. Radio Sci 14(6S):93-98, 1979
8. Low-dose reduction in transformation frequency compared to un-irradiated controls: The role of hyperradiosensitivity to cell death. Redpath, Short, Woodcock and Johnston, 2003. Radiation Research 159:422-436.
9. A dose response study following in utero and lactational exposure to di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP):
nonmonotonic dose response and low dose effects on rat brain aromatase activity. Andrade, Grande, Talsness, Grote and
Chahoud, 2006. Toxicology 227, 185–192.
10. Hormones and Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals: Low-Dose Effects and Nonmonotonic Dose Responses. Laura N.
Vandenberg, Theo Colborn, Tyrone B. Hayes, Jerrold J. Heindel, David R. Jacobs, Jr., Duk-Hee Lee, Toshi Shioda, Ana M.
Soto, Frederick S. vom Saal, Wade V. Welshons, R. Thomas Zoeller, and John Peterson Myers. Endocrine Reviews, June
2012, 33(3):378–455.

It may interest the reader that currently OSHA allows up to a 500 mg/day exposure
to CE-type compounds in the workplace, while the EPA, which has not proposed a
formal standard, has recommended about a 60 µg/day exposure. These are clearly
very different exposures.
This difference is caused because the EPA criteria are based upon the extrapolation
of animal carcinogenicity data, and typically the EPA does not consider modifying
factors such as mechanistic and species variations in the carcinogenic response; nor
does it use human data as a test or modifier of the animal extrapolation.
Thus, while the OSHA standard is designed to protect workers occupationally
exposed for perhaps most of their lifetime, the EPA, by virtue of its risk assessment
methodologies, advocates an exposure that is some 60-70,000 times lower.

2-28

3.1. Routes of Absorption .2
3.1.1. Skin .3
3.1.2. Lungs. 4
3.1.3. Digestive System .5
3.2. Target Organs . 6
3.2.1. Perfusion of organs .6
3.2.2. First Pass Effect .6
3.3. Penetration of Barriers .7
3.3.1. Phospholipid Bilayer.8
3.3.2. Partition Coefficient .9
3.3.3. Dissociation Constant . 10
3.4. Distribution . 13
3.4.1. Lymphatic Circulation . 13
3.4.2. Blood circulation . 13
3.5. Storage . 13
3.5.1. Bone . 14
3.5.2. Fat . 14
3.5.3. Resulting Distributions for Lead and Dioxin . 14
3.6. Biotransformation . 14
3.6.1. Variations in Biotransformation . 15
3.6.1.1. With Metabolic Rate . 16
3.6.1.2. With Sex . 16
3.6.1.3. With Route of Administration . 16
3.6.1.4. With previous Exposures. 16
3.6.1.5. With and Within Species used . 16
3.6.2. Phase-I Biotransformation . 17
3.6.3. Phase-II Biotransformation . 19
3.6.3.1. Glutathione . 20
3.6.3.2. Toluene . 20
3.6.3.3. Acetaminophen . 20

3.6.3.4. Phase I and II as Rate-Limiting . 21
3.6.4. Toxicant Interactions . 22
3.7. Excretion . 23
3.7.1. Lungs . 23
3.7.2. Liver . 23
3.7.3. Urine and Feces. 23
3.7.4. Species Variations . 24

3-1

3.
3.1. Routes of Absorption
Toxicants access the body through many absorption routes,
spilling into lymphatic and vascular compartments (F3.1). The
intravenous route allows complete and immediate penetration,
whereas other routes allow delayed and incomplete absorption.
The general hierarchy, ordered in decreasing absorption, is:
Injection > Inhalation > Contact on mucosa > Ingestion
External barriers, such as the skin and the gastrointestinal tract,
are quite complex. Internal barriers, as the blood-brain and
lung-blood barriers, may have a thickness of only 1 cell, as
little as 1 µm. Different routes of exposure (inhalation,
cutaneous, ingestion) may result in different amounts of
toxicants circulating in the bloodstream, as well as various
levels of toxicity. This relates to the toxicant’s physical and
chemical properties, anatomy (thickness of the membranes,
size of internal reservoirs) and biochemistry.

F3.1. General paths of toxicants through the body.
Casarett & Doull’s.

If one views the body as a multitude of membrane layers
through which a toxic agent penetrates to reach a site of action,
one can anticipate that the variables governing passive
diffusion and active transport control the rate and extent of
penetration. There may be a large factor (1,000-10,000)
between the concentration of a toxicant circulating in the blood
and that found at a target site.

Different routes of administration of drugs result in notably
different blood levels over time, as seen in F3.2. In this graph,
determining influences are the active excretion of penicillin by
the organic acid system of the kidneys, and penicillin’s binding
to albumin. In some of the curves in the graph, the level in the
blood is maintained by oil-phase, sub-cutaneous or enteric
compartments.

3-2

F3.3. Skin anatomy. From Medical Terminology, 1996.

The stratum corneum is only 15-20 dehydrated cells thick.
These cells are keratinized 1, extracellular lipids forming a
barrier. The thickness of these barrier cells varies tremendously
(anticubital fossa vs heel).
Skin penetration is usually through passive diffusion. For
example, when swimming or taking a bath or shower,
absorption is substantial. Skin is vulnerable to damage, and it’s
impermeable properties can easily be lost. Toxicants that are
small, non-polar and lipid-soluble will diffuse most rapidly.
Skin is vulnerable to organic solvents such as chloroform,
methanol and dimethyl sulfoxide because of dissolution of skin
lipids.

F3.2. Concentration of Penicillin in the blood following various modes
of administration. Pharmacology: Drug Actions and Reactions, 1978.

3.1.1. Skin
The skin (F3.3) has many roles:
Keeps out toxicants, UV and micro-organisms.
Biotransformation and detoxification.
Elimination of toxicants through sweat.
Temperature and fluids regulation.
Sensory reception (temperature, pressure, pain).

1

In mammals there are soft epithelial keratins (cytokeratins), and harder hair keratins. As
certain skin cells differentiate and become cornified, pre-keratin polypeptides are incorporated
into intermediate filaments. Eventually the nucleus and cytoplasmic organelles disappear,
metabolism ceases and cells undergo apoptosis as they become fully keratinized.

3-3

centers detecting pH and CO2 concentration at the base
of the brain. Oxygen concentration is less important.

3.1.2. Lungs
Lungs (F3.4) are a very deep, humid cavity that is difficult to
clean. Mucus-secreting cells and a ciliated epithelium
cooperate to achieve a particle removal half-life of 30-300 min.
Coughing can shorten the transit. The movement of the cilia in
the lungs is coordinated. One cell may have as many as 200
cilia. The “muco-ciliary escalator” keeps alveolar tissues clean
of particles and of many chemicals that absorb readily into the
mucus. If clearance of the mucus from the peri-alveolar region
is impaired for some reason, the flow of air is impaired into
and out of the lungs.
There is a critical physical limit to the flow of air in and out of
the lungs (Poiseuille’s Law):

Q

 P r 4
8L

Q is air flow,
P is pressure difference across the length of bronchiole,
L is length of the bronchiole,
is viscosity (air 190 µ-poise, water is 10,000 µ-poise),
r is bronchiole radius.

F3.4. General anatomy of the respiratory system.
Essentials of Environmental Toxicology, Taylor and Francis, 1996 .

Notice that if bronchiole radius (r) is reduced by a factor of 2,
the air flow is reduced by a factor of 16, for a given pressure
difference. This explains the importance of micro-airway
diameter in asthma attacks.

The rate goes up to 50 liters/min in high level exercise.
So, when working strenuously, transfer of toxicants by
this route may be considerably enhanced.
There are about one billion alveoli in the lungs, equivalent to a
70 m2 effective surface, which allow the exchange of gases,
primarily oxygen and carbon dioxide. Note that water soluble
gases such as HCl or formaldehyde normally do not make it

Normal respiration volume is about 0.5 liters at 12
respirations/minute = 6 liters/min.
You can live for a short time on 1.5 liters/minute.
The spontaneous rate of respiration is controlled by
3-4

into the alveoli, as they are dissolved into the mucus while
going down the bronchial tree.
Only particles less than 1 µm make it down into alveoli, larger
particles being retained at
higher levels in the
respiratory tract.

F3.6. Digestive system.
Essentials of Environmental
Toxicology, Taylor and Francis,
1996.

The digestive surface is
wet and functions well
both in absorption and
secretion.
Low pH from HCl
secretion is observed in
the stomach (pH ~2),
where bacteria are killed
and protein denatured to
make them more
sensitive to pepsin
degradation.

F3.5. Epithelial basement
membrane of the lung.

The distance to be covered
between alveolus and
capillary is only about 0.5
µm. The alveolar epithelial
cell is also called a
pneumocyte.
Q: What happens to a
particle of asbestos lodged in
the alveolus?
A: White blood cell either
from the blood or already in the surface of the alveolus will
attempt to phagocytize the particle, and enzymatically digest it.

The pancreas has both
an exocrine (pancreatic
enzymes for digestion) and an endocrine (insulin control over
absorption of glucose into cells) function.
Both bile and pancreatic juices are injected into the duodenum,
and they need a slightly basic medium (~ pH 8) for optimal
function.
Surprisingly, you can live with only a small length of intestine.
Although the small intestine usually has few bacterial colonies,
the colon is rich with them. This explains why very small
amounts of antibiotics can increase the growth rate of many
farm animals (and foster antibiotic resistance), as they make
nutrients more available to the animal, as opposed to the
bacteria.

Blood-soluble toxicants entering the lung will be transported
along with oxygen to the heart through the pulmonary vein.
The heart then distributes the toxicant to all parts of the body.
3.1.3. Digestive System
The process of digestion breaks up food mechanically and
chemically into useable elements in great part by hydrolysis,
which is why you need extra water after eating.

3-5

them, or, at least, any crests of exposure are highly attenuated,
which implies reduced toxicity.

F3.7 Anatomy of the
small intestine.
Essentials of Environmental
Toxicology, Taylor and
Francis, 1996.

The inner
geometry of the
small intestine is
such that the
epithelium is at
mechanical risk. It
is routinely
sloughed off
(~every 5 days in
the colon), so that
regeneration must
be continuous.
Most absorption of
food and toxicants
is in the small intestine. A notable exception is alcohol, a small
molecule absorbed directly in the stomach. In F3.7, the central
duct (green) connects with the lymphatic system, ultimately
meeting the blood near the aorta. But a toxin absorbed through
the intestinal vein goes to the portal vein and directly into the
liver.

T3.8. Blood perfusion of various body regions.
Medical Physiology, 1961.

3.2. Target Organs
F3.9. Blood and lymphatic circulations.

3.2.1. Perfusion of organs

Essentials of Environmental Toxicology, Taylor and Francis, 1996.

Toxicants act locally, but are also carried by body fluids. The
major fluids of the body, the blood and the lymphatic fluid,
(F3.9) have a big influence on where toxicants will act.
Very avascular tissues, like the lens of the eye, are less likely to
be exposed to fluid-borne toxicants than other tissues. This is
because the toxicant is likely to be disposed of before reaching

3.2.2. First Pass Effect
For any drug or toxicant reaching the blood, we should be
concerned with what is known as the “first pass effect”.
Because 28 % of the blood circulates through the liver in dense
capillary beds at low pressure and flow, and because the liver
3-6

has such good extractive capabilities, the agent may be
metabolized as it passes through the liver for the first time
(F3.10). Approximately 70 % of the blood supply to the liver
comes from the portal vein and 30 % via the hepatic artery. In
many cases, if the level of the agent in the blood (acquired by
ingestion, inhalation or dermal exposure) is “low”, little or
none will escape into the systemic blood (vena cava) on the
other side of the liver. It will be retained and metabolized
locally, even up to “moderate” concentrations of the agent,
because of the liver’s high filtration capacity. This may result
in hepatotoxicity.
At high levels of exposure and elevated concentrations in the
bloodstream, some agent will escape entrapment in the liver
and will be forwarded through the vena cava to the heart and
the systemic circulation. Toxicity may result from the
"escaped" fraction reaching other organs.

anticholinesterase (acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting) agent,
paraoxon, before it can be degraded further (F3.11). At low-tomoderate blood levels, no parathion will escape the liver, all
being destroyed in situ.

F3.11. Degradation of parathion. Et = Ethane

However, following excessive exposure (suicide attempts,
sprayers, field workers, etc.), not all of the parathion is
extracted by the liver, some escapes into the general circulation
to be biotransformed in tissues. In nerves (parathion is highly
lipid soluble), the intermediate, paraoxon, can inhibit
acetylcholinesterase, resulting in the accumulation of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine.

F.3.10. Incoming arrows
show circulation from the
digestive system into the
portal vein, while the
vertical arrow at top shows
exit to the vena cava.

Muscarinic, nicotinic and central nervous system toxic signs
and symptoms appear (T1.17). It is thought that the systemic
toxicity of parathion in poisoning cases arises from the extrahepatic biotransformation of the parathion not destroyed by the
liver.

As an example, the
insecticide parathion
must undergo oxidative
desulfuration (using the
non-specific monooxygenase aryl
hydrocarbon
hydroxylase, or AHH,
also known as CYP1A1)
to the much more
reactive

3.3. Penetration of Barriers
Indiscriminate absorption of foodstuffs and toxicants into the
body is prevented by tight junctions between cells. In a lot of
the epithelium (ie, skin, inside of vessels, respiratory and
digestive tracts), tight junctions prevent passage of molecules

3-7

between cells by simple diffusion (there are no gaps between
cells).
The Blood-Brain barrier is an example of such an anatomical
barrier that is particularly effective, making it difficult for
physicians to obtain therapeutic doses of some medications in
the Central Nervous System.

membrane recipe is a wall of peptidoglycans followed by
galactans and arabinans and further by mycolic acids. Most
substances cannot diffuse across this boundary. The survival of
the bacterium is enhanced by a slow division rate and detoxifying metabolism.
3.3.1. Phospholipid Bilayer

For example, manganese, even if absorbed into the
blood, is limited in its effects on the nervous system by
the blood-brain barrier. Unfortunately, particles can
dissolve on the nasal olfactory mucous membrane, then
proceed to nerve cells that lead to the olfactory bulb in
the brain, where it is redistributed to do neurological
damage…
“Pinocytosis” is a mechanism of volume bolus absorption that
is active in the gut, but is relatively rare. Down the line,
pinocytic particles are expected to meet peroxysomes for
molecular digestion. In spite of such marginal absorption
mechanisms, however, most toxicants have to enter the body
by going through cell membranes…

F3.12. PhosphoLipid bi-layer.

TRANSPORT MECHANISMS THROUGH THE BILAYER

Proteins have a notoriously difficult time traversing the
hydrophobic layers of the plasma membrane.
But Bacillus anthracis has a clever ways of pushing its proteins
through. Anthrax kills with a toxin, a compound composed of
three proteins—protective antigen, lethal factor, and edema
factor—that somehow penetrate the plasma membrane of the
host cell and enter the cytosol, where they make their kill5.

1. Passive diffusion (from a concentration gradient across the
bilayer): molecular size is paramount only in the case of large
molecules (fibers, dusts, peptides, proteins). Since most of the
chemicals of concern are of rather small molecular weight,
solubility is more important. Penetrating substances are lipidsoluble enough to penetrate cell membranes, but not lipidsoluble enough to remain trapped there, such as is the case for
the volatile organics that exert an effect on the CNS.
The rate of transport (dD/dt) across a membrane is governed by
Fick’s Law:
dD K  A   C0  Ci 

dt
T

Sometimes, a tough cell membrane can be a problem. An
organism that infects one-third of the world’s population,
Mycobacterium turberculosis, has evolved expert multi-drug
resistance primarily by resisting toxicant penetration. The
3-8

Although passive diffusion always follows a concentration
gradient, active transport can concentrate agents against such a
gradient.

A is the cross section exposed to the compound, Cx are the
concentrations on either side of the membrane, T is the
thickness of the membrane and K is the diffusion constant.

The CNS has 2 active transport systems: one for
organic acids, the other for organic bases.
The kidney has 2 active transport systems: one
primarily for sodium, the other for hydrogen.
The liver has 4 active transport systems: 2 for organic
acids, one for organic bases and one for neutral
compounds.

Protein binding to blood and tissue proteins can enhance or
retard transport by passive diffusion. Two features, the extent
of binding (ie, 30 % or 85 % bound) and the tenacity of binding
(loosely or tightly bound) are important. Unbound (free) agents
can be transported by passive diffusion, bound agents cannot.
To use passive diffusion effectively, a toxicant must be of
small molecular size (less than ~600 Dalton), non-polar, and
lipid-soluble (Lipinsky Rules).

The transport processes involved may be carrier proteins
(transferrins for iron, etc.) or enzyme systems in which energy
is expended. Specificity (sufficient or not) and binding capacity
limits are important, as these systems can be saturated.
According to the concentration of agent available, up to a
certain maximum, the agent will be transported effectively.

2. Facilitated transport: mechanisms for sugars (glucose) and
amino-acids (vitamins), whose details are not entirely
understood. Involves membrane proteins which encourage
transfer.

Lead, for example, is transported by the same carrier system as
calcium and, indeed, competes with calcium. They are both
divalent cations and, in calcium deficient states, lead will be
absorbed more efficiently. The final "resting place" for lead is
in the long bones where one finds much higher levels than are
circulating in the bloodstream (up-gradient transport).

3. Active transport for inorganic ions and for xenobiotics:
this process needs ATP. These systems maintain membrane
potentials and allows cell-level excretion of xenobiotics (drug
resistance).
Most of the chemicals of concern to the toxicologist are
relatively small molecules that enter the body and reach critical
sites by passive diffusion. A few exceptions include heavy
metals (Pb, Cd, Zn, Co), which are acquired by active
transport, using carrier systems designed to transport calcium
or iron. These transport systems are not sufficiently selective to
exclude other divalent cations of roughly the same size and
charge (see example, F7.4).

3.3.2. Partition Coefficient
Since membranes must be crossed, the solubility of a drug or
toxicant from one medium into the next is a critical
determinant of its migration into tissues.
The determination of migrating ability between two media can
be specified between any two liquid or solid media, but
frequently, reference media are used such as from water to
chloroform, hexane or octanol (see below).
3-9

POW  log 10

T3.13a. Hydrophilic Lipophilic Molecules
Acetamide
Methanol
Formic acid
Diethyl ether
p-Dichlorobenzene
Hexamethylbenzene
2,2',4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphenyl

[in Octanol ]
[in Water]

In the example of F3.13, one can see that as rats are exposed to
breathing various Volatile Organic Compounds, the ones with
the larger Partition Coefficient between Blood and Air tend to
be draw out of the inspired air more rapidly and in greater
amounts (less isoprene than benzene than styrene in the blood).
As well, upon cessation of exposure, some substances tend to
remain in the blood for longer periods. However, the decay in a
complete animal can also be influenced by fat stores, since the
three compounds shown migrate to fatty tissues from the blood
(and vice-versa).

Pow
-1.16
-0.82
-0.41
0.83
3.37
4.61
6.41

Significant relationships have been demonstrated between POW
and the potential for a chemical to bio-accumulate in the
aquatic environment, to concentrate in fish and adsorb on soil
and sediments. A low POW (less than 3) can be used to convince
regulatory authorities that an agent is unlikely to bioaccumulate or cause aquatic toxicity.
3.3.3. Dissociation Constant
Since biological membranes tend to give passage preferentially
to uncharged molecules, it is important to know the degree of
ionization of molecules when dissolved in body fluids.
The degree of ionization can be calculated from Ka, the
Dissociation Constant of the molecule, and the HendersonHasselbalch equation, shown below.

 H    A 
Ka 
 HA

F3.13. Effect of blood-air partition coefficient on venous blood
concentrations in rats for a 6-h exposure to 2 g/m3 (model).

The partition coefficient (POW) of a substance between a
lipophilic solvent, usually n-octanol, and water is commonly
and conventionally used to quantify substance transfer not only
between body compartments but also between compartments in
the environment (biota vs air, water or soil).

Ka is so named because it refers to dissociation of the acid (H+)
part of the molecule, as opposed to the basic part (OH-). The
Dissociation Constants (Ka) of various substances can be found
from tables.

3-10

As an application of this equation, let us look at the absorption
of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) from the human stomach…
Remember that pH = -log [H+] and pKa = - log [Ka].

MEMBRANE
STOMACH
pH 4.3
5 % non-ionized

The pKa for salicylic acid is 3.
The pH of blood is 7.3.
The pH in a full human stomach could be 4.3.

PLASMA
pH 7.3
0.005 % non-ionized

This implies that most aspirin molecules that get into the
stomach wall (plasma) are unable to diffuse back into the
stomach, while there is a continuous 5 % of aspirin molecules
able to cross into the stomach wall from the stomach.
Aspirin concentration rises in the stomach wall as a result of
that trap, and aspirin is steadily pumped by diffusion into the
blood and absorbed effectively.

We use a modified Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:

 non  ionized form 
 HA
log 
 log   pK a  pH
ionized form 
 A 

The pH difference between compartments has created a
gradient of aspirin concentration.
Since pH is so important to agent penetration, the body has
many systems to control it. You can live only for a little while
with deviations in pH of about 0.5 units around 7.3.

According to the equation, if pKa = pH, then pKa - pH = 0, and
half of molecules are ionized, the other half not; that is, [nonionized] = [ionized].
If we put aspirin in the stomach at pH 4.3, then
pKa - pH = 3 – 4.3 = -1.3, which means that about 5 % of the
aspirin is non-ionized (10-1.3).
This 5 % of molecules of aspirin is able to cross into the
hydrophobic membranes of the stomach wall, and ultimately
into the circulation.

pH is stabilized by :
Buffer systems (bicarbonate, phosphate, protein systems),
Breathing: CO2 elimination helps regulate pH,
Kidneys.
In case you are wondering, the mechanism of aspirin action has
been at least partly elucidated: the acetyl group of aspirin seals
access to a cavity of the enzyme prostaglandin H2 synthase
(“PGHS”), preventing transformation of arachidonic acid into
prostaglandin H2 (see F3.14).

When these molecules cross into the intracellular fluid and into
the blood, where the pH is 7.3, the ratio of ionized to nonionized is altered: pKa – pH is now 3 – 7.3 or - 4.3,
which means that only 0.005 % of the molecules are now nonionized, and able to cross cell membranes.

More complex molecules, such as citric acid
(shown), may have many dissociation steps. In
the case of citric acid, they occur at pKas of
3.14, 4.77 and 6.39.
3-11

F3.14. Mechanism of action of aspirin.
Aspirin stops an inflammatory cascade
which converts arachidonic acid, a fatty
acid of cell membranes, into
prostaglandins, by inhibition of the
enzyme cyclo-oxygenase.

At the cellular level, physical and
chemical properties may prevent
entrance of toxicants inside cells.
If toxicants do penetrate, they can be pumped out by efflux
pumps or multi-drug resistance transporters, the same types of
pumps responsible for drug resistance in bacteria:
Multi-Drug Resistance associated P-glycoprotein
(MDR1 gene) is weakly expressed in the liver, but more
strongly in the intestines as well as T cells. It is a key
factor in the blood-brain barrier, and has been likened
to a “hydrophobic molecule vacuum-cleaner”. The
diagram at right shows
(A) the transport of a red
substrate from the
membrane to a pocket,
and (B) exclusion of the
substrate using an
ATP(yellow)-dependant
conformational change.
P-glycoprotein can export
hundreds of chemically unrelated toxins, using binding
sites in an internal cavity capable of stereoselectivity
based on hydrophobic and aromatic interactions15,
the phospholipid export pump (MDR3 gene)
translocates phospholipids (from bile, for example)
from inner to outer aspect of membranes,

3-12

the conjugate export pump (MRP2 gene) transfers
organic anions into bile (conjugates of bilirubin,
glutathione, glucoronide and sulfates).

(stirring plasma with a glass rod will polymerize fibrinogen to
it), one gets serum.
Keep in mind that plasma protein such as albumin (normal
levels of albumin are 3.5-5 grams/dl) can keep toxicants in the
blood for a period of time (binding 0 to 100 %), attenuating the
release of toxicants to the organs.
Total plasma volume in the average human adult is 3 liters,
so any soluble toxicant injected into a vein would quickly be
diluted into that volume.

Chewing with metal dental fillings releases mercury and
activates these pumps, reducing the exposure of cells. Some
chemicals, such as synthetic musks, are capable of specifically
disabling these cellular pumps, leaving the cells vulnerable to
other exposures9.
Once in the bloodstream, toxicants can be taken up by organs
specialized to deal with them, or damage organs that are not.

Considerations of molecular size and lipid solubility are again
of importance in gaining access from the blood into organs.
Some chemicals present in the blood find more affinity for
specific tissues such as fat (DDT) and bone (lead), and may
concentrate there over time.

3.4. Distribution
The two Circulatory Systems are by far the most powerful
distributors of toxicants throughout the body.
3.4.1. Lymphatic Circulation

F3.16. Typical toxicant storage sites in the
body. Essentials of Environmental Toxicology, Taylor

The lymphatic fluid can be seen as a yellowish crystalline-like
fluid exuding from a cut. It carries away extra-cellular space
proteins and particulate matter. It is driven mostly by muscle
contraction, but also by a specialized system of valves
throughout the system of lymph capillaries (F3.9), using only
partly blood circulation as a propellant. Without lymph flow,
you could only live for 24-hours.

and Francis, 1996.

Where toxicants end up is of great
importance in final determination of
toxicity. But controlling drug
deposition in the body is difficult. In
the pharmaceutical industry,
unfavorable “ADMET” (absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion
and toxicity) is responsible for more
than half of compound rejections at
the level of clinical trials.

3.4.2. Blood circulation
F3.15. Red Blood Cells trapped in fibrin
clot.

The delivery of toxicants to target
organs is primarily from the blood,
because of the speed of its transit.
Blood is made of erythrocytes,
leucocytes, platelets and plasma. If
fibrin is removed from plasma

3.5. Storage
Storage is a type of bioaccumulation. Tissues and animals may
bio-accumulate toxic halogenated defenses from compounds

3-13

they synthesize (Sea Slug, left) or from external sources such
as their diet (Aplysia, right).

levels of 14 PCBs and 11 pesticides. These increased
concentrations in turn reduced the 15 subjects’ metabolic rates
either through effects on mitochondria or on the thyroid gland 7.
Since fat is so adept at absorbing a large category of
liposoluble compounds, can it be viewed simply as a
compartment designed to attenuate the exposures of the
remaining body compartments to toxicants?
3.5.3. Resulting Distributions for Lead and
Dioxin
As can be seen in T3.17, body tissue distributions may vary
substantially between toxicants. Hair and nails have very high
concentrations of lead, and are often used to document lead
intoxication.
T3.17. Distribution of Pb and Dioxin
%
%
LEAD
DIOXIN
Bone
95.0
Fat
95.0
Liver
4.4
Liver
1.1
Lung
0.1
Muscle & Skin
2.5
Kidney
0.3
Gut
1.3
Brain
0.2
Other
0.2

These chemicals make them unappetizing to predators,
including sharks. Some of these compounds have been shown
to move up the food chain into the milk of Faroe Island women
(from whale blubber), just like PCBs8.
Yet other animals get toxins from
their prey, and then metabolically
upgrade their toxicity (x 5) to
protect themselves. This small
tropical frog, Dendrobates, sports
a very toxic skin (pumiliotoxin).

3.6. Biotransformation

3.5.1. Bone

It has been estimated that 80 % of drugs taken by people
emerge from the body intact. But what happens to the
remaining 20 % is interesting…
The major function of the various biotransformation pathways
in body tissues is to convert relatively lipid-soluble exogenous
(and endogenous) agents into water-soluble, nontoxic and
readily excreted compounds. The strategy is: make toxicants
water-soluble so they will not diffuse back across cell
membranes, and will be more easily controllable for excretion.

Bone is actually in a state of perpetual regeneration every 7
years. One major constituent of bone is hydroxy-apatite
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2. In intoxication, fluoride may substitute for
OH (making bones brittle), and radio-active strontium or lead
for calcium.
3.5.2. Fat
Body fat is a storage compartment that varies in size,
depending on the individual. In dieting, autointoxication can
occur as toxic substances are released into the blood.
Volunteers who lost 10 kg saw an increase of 23 % in blood
3-14

enzymes (as opposed to structural, messenger or transport
proteins), agents that facilitate the transformation of one
chemical into another.

GENERAL MECHANISM OF BIO-DETOXIFICATION
hydrophilic toxicants are generally eliminated from
the body in their original chemical form,
lipophilic toxicants must be biotransformed for
elimination.

AGENT

Many of the detoxifications reactions occur within the
endoplasmic reticulum of individual cells.
Unfortunately, biotransformation can also result in bioactivation or toxication, which involves the production of a
more powerful toxicant derivative from the original toxicant.

PHASE 1
Oxidation
Reduction
Hydrolysis

The major organ for detoxification is the liver. Detoxification
is conventionally segmented into Phase I and Phase II
reactions. These reactions are also used by the body to
eliminate normal by-products of metabolism. For example,
hemoglobin is metabolized to bilirubin, which goes through the
biliary system into the feces. Molecular weights smaller than
250 Dalton are excreted in urine, molecular weights larger than
350 Dalton are excreted in bile and feces.
Not all chemicals are processed through both Phases (F3.18).
Generally, Phase I puts a molecular handle on molecules, while
Phase II makes them more hydrophilic.
Heroine and codeine metabolism involve Phase I,
acetaminophen (Tylenol) and morphine go directly to Phase
II.1

PHASE 2
Glucoronidation
Sulphation
Acetylation
Glutathione
NON-TOXIC
PRODUCT

F3.18. Biotransformation pathways.

When a single chemical agent is biotransformed, it is common
that multiple forms of the agent result from the
biotransformation process. As these reactions are often
dependant on enzyme kinetics, exposure concentration may
influence the variety of molecular species produced. These
multiple forms of the original agent make toxicity more
complex.
However, most of the differences in biotransformation are
quantitative (as opposed to qualitative), resulting from
changes in the rates at which toxicants are converted to
intermediates and to water soluble, readily excreted products.
Biotransformation varies according to many factors such as
species, strain, age, weight, emotional state, gut bacteria and
sex.

3.6.1. Variations in Biotransformation
The importance of bio-transformation in biological organisms
is underlined by the fact that most proteins are actually



The molecular specificity of enzymes is determined by mechanical fitting (shape),
electrostatic and dipolar interactions, as well as electron and proton tunneling.

3-15

3.6.1.1. With Metabolic Rate

Many of the sex differences in gene expression in the table
above are hormone dependant: the differences are considerably
attenuated if testes and ovaries are removed12.

For example, warfarin is used both as a rat poison and as an
anticoagulant, and is primarily broken down by CYP2C9
(F3.23). 18 % of people have a variant of CYP2C9 that slows
their metabolism of the drug. They are more susceptible to
side-effects, such as severe internal bleeding. In this case,
slower metabolism leads to increased effects because the AUC
is larger.
Rodents metabolize drugs more rapidly than people do. To
reach the same blood level in a rodent model, administered
doses are increased. Although the blood levels are then
comparable, gastrointestinal tract and liver levels become much
higher in the rat, which increases tumors in the liver and
digestive system. In this case, faster metabolism leads to
increased effects.

3.6.1.3. With Route of Administration

The toxic reaction is also influenced by the route of
administration, as this determines the order in which the
toxicant will encounter various organs, and the toxicant flow.
3.6.1.4. With previous Exposures

The biotransformation activity can be enhanced (up-regulated)
by exposure to compounds such as phenobarbital, a technique
used to harvest large quantities of the enzymes.
Not only will individual liver cells have more enzymes under
phenobarbital induction, but the overall liver mass will increase
with chronic exposure (F3.20).
Receptors such as Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR),
Pregnane X Receptor (PXR) and Constitutive Androstane
Receptor (CAR) mediate the transcriptional responses that
amplify the responses to xenobiotic exposures.

3.6.1.2. With Sex

In rodents, males have a capacity for some bio-transformations
about 5 times that of females. This often corresponds to major
response variations in animal experiments.
An example of a sex-based variation is the effect of the phytoestrogen diadzein in rats. Injections increase growth hormone,
testosterone and muscle mass in males, while the opposite
happens in females10.

3.6.1.5. With and Within Species used

Rodents are frequently used as test animals, not because they
are similar to humans, but because they are inexpensive, easy
to house and breed, require minimal care and are easy to
handle.

T3.19. Genes Expressed differently between the Sexes
Mouse Tissue
Liver
Fat
Muscle
Brain

0 to 20% difference
72 %
68 %
55 %
14 %

300% difference
0.5 %
0.3 %
0.1 %
0.1 %

F3.20. Phenobarbital
induces liver weight gain
and enzyme production, and
inhibits apoptosis in the
liver. As the drug is
removed, a sharp increase in
apoptosis restores balance.
Boelsterli, 2007.

3-16

Commonly used test species share some of the metabolic
capabilities of humans, but lack many others. These metabolic
variations occur not only between species and strains, but
between different individuals of the same species.

molecular oxygen into aromatic rings to form oxepin or
benzene oxide (F3.22, center).
F3.21. Part of a CYP450 (multicolored
ribbon) enzyme binding to
putidaredoxin (light blue and white).

Even within a group of 75 inbred rats, the same high dose of
acetaminophen (Tylenol) produces various degrees of liver
damage. But pre-exposure analysis of urine makes it possible
to predict with 85 % accuracy the level of liver damage that
will be produced by the drug in individual rats11.

Center for Computational Research, U. of Buffalo.

Some differences can be traced to minor genetic variations
among individuals, called single-nucleotide polymorphisms, or
SNPs. Genome investigators at the National Institutes of
Health (US) have already compiled more than 800,000
examples of such variations in humans.
3.6.2. Phase-I Biotransformation

Clopidogrel inhibits blood clots and is
prescribed after a heart attack to reduce
subsequent coronary events. Clopidogrel is
inactive, and must be metabolized in the liver
by cytochrome P450 enzymes, including
CYP2C19. Clopidogrel-treated patients who
carry one or two ineffective variant alleles of
CYP2C19 are 1.5 to 3.5 times more likely to
die or experience cardiovascular-related
complications than patients who carry highfunctioning alleles. Genotyping would allow
patients with these mutations to use alternate
drugs13,14.

These catabolic (breakdown) enzymatic reactions deal with the
insertion, addition or exposure of reactive groups, initiating the
conversion of the molecule: a polar group is either unmasked
or added, to enhance water solubility. The typical mechanisms
used are oxidation, reduction and hydrolysis. The reactions
are carried out by enzymes in microsomes and in the
endoplasmic reticulum.
The major system is cytochrome P-450 (F3.21, F3.23), an
array of (7700 known distinct sequences) mono-oxygenase
enzymes in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Fe++ acts as a
source of electrons and oxygen. The “450” (nm) refers to the
bluish color of the enzymes.
The role of the mono-oxygenases is the oxidation or reduction
of existing groups present on the molecule or the insertion of
3-17

CYP1A1 (AHA)
Benzo[a]pyrene and other polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
CYP1A2
Acetaminophen, 2- Acety laminofluorene, 4-Aminobiphenyl, 2-Aminofluorene,
2-Naphthylamine, NNK, Amino acid pyrrolysis products (DiMeQx, MeIQ,
MelQx, Glu P-I, Glu P-2, IQ, PhIP, Trp P-I, Trp P-2), Tacrine
CYP2A6
N-Nitrosodiethylamine, NNK, nicotine.
CYP2B6
6- Aminochrysene, Cyclophosphamide, Ifosphamide
CYP2C8, 9 (shown), 18, 19

Tienilic acid, Valproic acid
CYP2D6
NNK*
CYP2E1
Acetaminophen, Acrylonitrile, Alcohol, Benzene, Carbon tetrachloride,
Chloroform, Dichloromethane, 1,2-Dichloropropane, Ethylene dibromide,
Ethylene dichloride, Ethyl carbamate, Halothane,
N-Nitrosodimethylamine, Styrene, Trichlorothylene, Vinyl chloride
CYP3A4
CYP3As metabolize 50 % of drugs and are major determinants of first pass and
systemic clearances. Grapefruit juice elevates blood levels of many drugs
primarily by inhibiting intestinal CYP3A4 during absorption.
Acetaminophen, Aflatoxin B, and G, 6-Aminochrysene, Benzo[a]pyrene 7,8dihydrodiol, Cyclophosphamide, Ifosphamide, 1- Nitropyrene, Sterigmatocystin,
Senecionine,
Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate
CYP4A9/11
None known

F3.22. Metabolic pathways for benzene. Casarett & Doull.

NNK (nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone) is a
tobacco-specific nitrosamine that requires metabolic activation by
cytochrome P450 enzymes. Smokers who have two fully functional
copies of the CYP2A6 gene smoke 7-10 more cigarettes per day than
smokers who have only one.
The enzyme CYP1A2 activates many cancer-causing chemicals in
tobacco smoke. The enzyme is inhibited by drinking 500 ml of grapefruit
juice every day, a tactic to reduce the chances of cancer from smoking.

F3.23. Xenobiotics activated to more toxic forms by individual
CYtochrome P450 enzymes. The identification following “CYP” refers
to enzymatic activity traceable to specific genes: class-subclass-gene.
Growth hormone pulse profile is a major determinant of which P450
enzymes are expressed. Casarett & Doull.



Hormones are often most effective when released in pulses as opposed to
continuous releases.

3-18

Another group of Phase I enzymes includes the hydrolases
(esterases, proteases, lipases), their function being to hydrolyze
peptide and ester bonds of a wide variety of chemicals to
expose polar carboxyl, and hydroxyl or amino groups.
These enzymes sometimes transform aromatic compounds into
epoxides (R-O-R), compounds significantly more toxic
(mutagenic) than their parents. There are many examples of
xenobiotics activated by individual P450 enzymes to more
toxic species, as shown in F3.23.
On the other hand, CYP2B6, for example, also disables more
than a dozen known herbicides, pesticides and industrial
chemicals.

F3.24. PHASE II ENZYMES (“transferases”)

Many drug companies now conduct lab tests to determine the
influence of potential drugs on common metabolic pathways,
such as cytochrome P450 enzymes. If the drug affects them, it
is pulled from further development, so that no interference with
other drugs can occur.

DeTox
Group

Enzyme Family

Enzymes

Substrates

Sulfate

SulfoTransferases

SULT 1A1 to
2B1

Glutathione

Glutathione STransferases

GST A1 to Z1

Phenol, Toluene,
Acetaminophen
Peroxide,
Acetaminophen,
Heavy Metals

Acetyl

Arylamine,
Aralkylamine or
Glycine N-Acetyl
Transferases

NAT 1 to 2
AANAT,
GLYAT

Methyl

Methyl Transferases

COMT

Glucoronyl

UDP-Glucuronosyl
Transferases

UGT 1A12B28

Amino Acid
Ornithine

3.6.3. Phase-II Biotransformation
The introduction or exposure of reactive groups by Phase I
prepares the way for Phase II. Although the enzymatic
reactions also occur in microsomes and mitochondria, it is
mostly cytosolic enzymes (F3.24) that transfer covalently
normal body constituents (sulfate, glutathione, acetyl/glycine,
methyl, glucuronyl, amino acids as well as ornithine) to
reactive groups.
Note that a molecule must be provided by the body to the
toxicant to further enhance hydrophilicity in these conjugation
reactions.
The conjugation converts the intermediates into water soluble
products amenable to excretion via the urine and feces.

3-19

Amino acid N-acyl
Transferases
Ornithine Carbamoyl
Transferases

BACATs
OCT

Arylamine and
Hydrazine drugs
Cathecols,
Indolamines,
Thiouracil
Phenol,
Trichloroethanol,
Nicotinic acid
CoA-activated Bile
Acid
Choline

3.6.3.1. Glutathione

Glutathione (shown)
binds to heavy metals
with its sufhydryl (SH) extremity. The
transport proteins
Multi-Drug Resistance
Protein (MRP) and Pglycoprotein (Pgp) ship
these adducts out of
cells, and the body then
eliminates the
molecular complex through urine or bile.
The conjugation of toluene derivatives with glutathione (F3.25)
may result in the formation of nephrotoxic cysteinyl thioether
derivatives (F3.25 - toluene conversion into benzyl sulfate,
then into an N-acetyl-S-benzyl-L-cysteine derivative).
Free hydroxy groups, as in o-cresol or p-cresol formed from
toluene, are susceptible to glucuronidation and sulfation.
Many chemicals already possess electrophilic groups (as in
cresol or phenol, which have hydroxy groups) and do not need
to undergo Phase I biotransformation, proceeding immediately
to Phase II reactions.

F3.25. Metabolic pathways for toluene.
Low et al. Toxicol. Indust. Health 4, 49-75, 1988.

become active. In any study of a chemical's excretion, it is
advisable to know which excretory products are found at which
dose, and have a method by which all can be quantitated. The
rodents are notorious for introducing a new pathway when a
threshold dose is attained.

3.6.3.2. Toluene

3.6.3.3. Acetaminophen

Toluene can be biotransformed into a number of
products (F3.25), but not all of these may be
produced by all species. Certain pathways may
occur at low levels of exposure while, at high
levels, a second or even a third pathway may

Humans may do the same, as is shown in F3.26 for the drug
acetaminophen. Acetaminophen (“Tylenol”) is both
hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic at high doses. The drug (F3.26,
top-center) already has a handy hydroxyl group, useable to tag
glucuronide or sulfate conjugates. However, these pathways
can saturate at high exposures, because of enzyme limitations.

3-20

This leaves the reactive, electrophilic and unstable intermediate
free to seek a "neutral" environment by reacting with any
nucleophilic groups in the region - DNA, membrane proteins,
cellular proteins, etc.
The result is cellular damage with leakage through damaged
membranes and, if severe enough, necrosis and cell death.
3.6.3.4. Phase I and II as Rate-Limiting

In most tissues of the body, there are excess amounts of monooxygenases for the cells' needs, but the various conjugating
enzymes are limited. Although sufficient for low level
exposure, the rate-limiting step at high exposures is the activity
of these enzymes and their dependency on
(1) a sufficient cellular store of the conjugating substance, and
(2) the rates of replacement or re-synthesis of these substances
(glutathione, glucoronic acid, sulfate, glycine, etc.).
A dramatic decrease in the activity of the enzymes occurs until
the stores are replaced, a period of 18 to 48 hr in many species.
Repeated exposures result in repeated insults to the body's
tissues and considerable damage if the reactive intermediates
formed cannot be conjugated.
The formation of certain conjugates is quite different between
species. For example, the human glucuronidates much of the
acetaminophen ingested, with a small amount of sulfate formed
unless the level of exposure is high, and then glutathione
derivatives (leading to mercapturic acids) will be found. The
guinea pig does the same. The rodents (mice, rats)
produce quantities of both glucuronide, sulfate and glutathione
derivatives.
The conjugation of a simple molecule such as phenol is quite
species-specific, as is shown in F3.28, showing the pathways of
phenol and the oxidative hydroxylation product, quinol.

F3.26. Pathways of acetaminophen disposition.

(PHS = Prostagladin H synthase).
With higher dosage, the cytochrome P-450 mono-oxygenases
begin to react with the unconjugated drug, producing a
quinoneimine derivative which can be utilized by the
glutathione conjugating enzyme to form a mercapturic acid
derivative. At excessively high dosage, this pathway can be
saturated and even halted.
3-21

While Phase I and II enzyme complexes are ubiquitously
distributed through the body's tissues, they are not uniformly
distributed, but bear some relationship to the overall metabolic
activity of the particular organ. Liver has the highest activity,
the kidney has approximately 20 % of the liver's activity, while
brain, muscle, etc. may have 1 to 10 %. This concentration of
enzyme activity is responsible for chemical-induced cellular
damage in the liver.
The detoxification properties of Phase II enzymes can be
manipulated, even by simple dietary changes. Broccoli sprouts
contain a substance, sulforaphane, which stimulates the
production of Phase II enzymes, causing carcinogens to be
more efficiently detoxified.

In the metabolism of ethanol, shown below, the enzyme
alcohol dehydrogenase has an affinity for ethanol 100 times
greater than to ethylene glycol.
In case of ethylene glycol (car coolant) intoxication,
intravenous alcohol is recommended. This allows ethanol to
monopolize the enzyme, and for the renal excretion of
unchanged ethylene glycol to occur slowly, avoiding its
conversion to more toxic metabolites.
Ethanol

3.6.4. Toxicant Interactions

Acetaldehyde

Alcohol
Dehydrogenase

If more than one agent solicits the liver enzymes, interference
or competition between two chemicals for biotransformation
by the same or similar mono-oxygenases may result. The
chemicals might be two components in a mixture or an
"occupational" chemical plus an over-the-counter or
prescription drug. Unfortunately, there are too few good, well
studied, examples of toxicant interactions in the literature.
However, three such studies are listed in the references2-4.

Acetate

Aldehyde
Dehydrogenase

You might have noticed a slight trembling the day after alcohol
intake. The enzymes monopolized for alcohol digestion would
normally provide nervous system nutrients, but are not
available in sufficient quantity to fill the needs of the nervous
system.

F3.27.
Distribution of
glucose-6phosphatase
enzyme in the
liver. X 25.
Biological
structures, 1979.

3-22

F3.28. Species variation in the metabolic conversion of
Phenol in vivo. Percent of 24-hour excretion as…
Glucuronide
Sulfate
Species
Phenol Quinol Phenol Quinol
Pig
100
0
0
0
Indian fruit bat
90
0
10
0
Rhesus monkey
35
0
65
0
Cat
0
0
87
13
Human
23
7
71
0
Squirrel monkey
70
19
10
0
Rat tail monkey
65
21
14
0
Guinea pig
78
5
17
0
Hamster
50
25
25
0
Rat
25
7
68
0
Ferret
41
0
32
28
Rabbit
46
0
45
9
Gerbil
15
0
69
15

3.7. Excretion
3.7.1. Lungs
Lungs can breathe OUT toxicants as well as they can breathe
them IN. For example, 90 % of alcohol is transformed into
acetaldehyde in the liver, but 10 % is left unchanged, and can
be exhaled or urinated (thus, the roadside test).
3.7.2. Liver
Feces can contain ingested toxicants which were not absorbed
by the body at all, or toxicants that were secreted out either by
the intestine or the bile (DDT and lead).
Toxicants that are being expelled through bile can be
reabsorbed into the body, possibly to produce more damage to
the liver. This re-absorption is called the entero-hepatic loop.
Techniques have been developed to interrupt the loop by
ingesting an adsorbent such as carbon black, that will bind
tightly and carry toxicants into the feces.
Bile secretions contain detergent-like acids for digestion of
fats in the intestine. Most of these acids are reabsorbed in the
intestine. Lithocholic acid is not reabsorbed, and is one of the
most toxic natural substances in the body, acting as a mutagen
that also inhibits DNA repair, which has led in animal models
to colon cancer6.
3.7.3. Urine and Feces
There are about 1 million nephrons in a kidney. The incoming
blood loses fluids through the glomerulus by mechanical
filtration (sieve) and proceed to recuperate needed components
at the proximal tubule, the loop of Henle, and the distal tubule.
The kidney is therefore an organ of RECUPERATION,

3-23

throwing out everything, and selectively reabsorbing precious
components.

the gastro-intestinal tract content, for example by adding
mineral oil to the diet.
Older people are know to be more sensitive to drugs. For
example, they have increased sensitivity to central nervous
system depressants, to side effects such as high blood pressure
from psychotropic medication, and are more likely to
experience hemorrhage from anti-coagulants. These changes
correspond to alterations in the distribution and transport of
drugs as a result of reduction in lean body mass (vs fat), serum
albumin in the plasma, and total body water, as well as
reductions in the function of organs which assist in the
metabolism (enzymes) and elimination of substances.

F3.29. Diagram of a
nephron. Medical Physiology,
Guyton, 1981.

The strategy of making
toxicants hydrophilic
then becomes clearer.
At the glomerulus,
hydrostatic pressure
forces small molecules
smaller than 60,000
Dalton out into
Bowman’s capsule,
thus conserving blood
cells and large proteins.
20 % of all dissolved
compounds less than
protein size are initially
lost in the kidney.
From the expelled fluid, 99 % of the needed components (for
example, glucose) are recuperated in the loop of Henle. We
would die rapidly without this constant recuperation.
Some active secretion into the urine occurs in the distal tubule,
such that compounds that are actively secreted (PAH, Diodrast)
can have a clearance greater than the glomerular filtration rate.
The pH of the urine can vary between 4.5 to 8.
With this delicate anatomy, is it surprising
that with a little hypertension, some protein
or blood could leak into the urine?

3.7.4. Species Variations
Using benzene as an example, most animals appear to excrete
low internal doses as metabolites in the urine. The urinary
profiles in benzene-exposed mice, rats, and primates are shown
in T3.30. For the low-dose treatments, a higher fraction of
benzene is converted to hydroquinone and its conjugates in the
mice compared to the rat. The urine of the monkeys, on the
other hand, contains approximately the same fraction of
hydroquinone as found in the urine of mice. One must keep in
mind, however, that a smaller fraction of inhaled benzene is
metabolized in the monkey compared to the mouse. The
urinary profile of the chimpanzee is similar to that of the rat in
regard to the hydroquinone fraction.

The rate of elimination of many fat-soluble
compounds can be enhanced by increasing the lipophilicity of

F3.30. Urinary Excretion of (14C) Benzene. from Sabourin16 17,18.

3-24

REFERENCES
1. Food, Drugs and Poisons in the Human Body. Albert, A. Xenobiosis. Chapman and Hall Ch. 7, pp. 117-156, 1987.
2. The effects of ethanol on the kinetics of toluene in man. Wallen, M. et al. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 76, 414-419, 1984.
3. Interactions of m-xylene and aspirin metabolism in man. Campbell, L. et al. Br. J. Ind. Med. 45, 127-132, 1988.
4. Mutual metabolic suppression between benzene and toluene in man. Inoue, O. et al. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health
60, 15-20, 1988.
5. Scientists Getting to the Core of Bacillus anthracis. Leslie Pray. The Scientist 16[12]:34, Jun. 10, 2002.
6. Vitamin D Receptor As an Intestinal Bile Acid Sensor. Makishima, Makoto, Lu, Timothy T., Xie, Wen, Whitfield, G.
Makishima M et al. Science 296: 1313-1316, 2002.
7. Thermogenesis and weight loss in obese individuals: A primary association with organochlorine pollution. Tremblay,
A. et al. 2004. International Journal of Obesity 28 (July):936-939.
8. Amazing Organohalogens. Gordon W. Gribble. American Scientist, 342-349. July-August 2004.
9. Nitromusk and polycyclic musk compounds as long-term inhibitors of cellular xenobiotic defense systems mediated
by multidrug transporters. Luckenbach, T., and D. Epel. Environmental Health Perspectives 113(January):17-24. 2005.
10. Effects of diadzein on muscle growth and some endocrine hormone levels in rats. Wang J and Han ZK. Messina MJ et
al (eds), Second International Symposium on the Role of Soy in Preventing and Treating Chronic Diseases. Brussels, Belgium,
p. 70, Sept 16th 1996.
11. Pharmaco-metabonomic phenotyping and personalized drug treatment. Clayton TA et al. Nature 440, 1073-1077, 20
April 2006.
12. Tissue-specific expression and regulation of sexually dimorphic genes in mice. Yang X et al. Genome Research 9951004. 16th August 2006.
13. Cytochrome P-450 Polymorphisms and Response to Clopidogrel. Mega JL et al. New England Journal of Medicine,
Volume 360:354-362, Number 4, January 22, 2009.
14. Genetic Determinants of Response to Clopidogrel and Cardiovascular Events. Simon T et al. New England Journal of
Medicine, Number 4, Volume 360:363-375, January 22, 2009.
15. Structure of P-Glycoprotein Reveals a Molecular Basis for Poly-Specific Drug Binding. Stephen G. Aller et al. 27
March 2009 Vol 323 Science.
16. Effect of exposure concentration, exposure rate, and route of administration on metabolism of benzene by F344 rats
and B6C3F1 mice. Sabourin PJ, Bechtold WE, Griffith WC, Birnbaum LS, Lucier G, Henderson RF. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
99:421-444 (1989).
17. Effect of dose on the absorption and excretion of [14C]benzene administered orally or by inhalation in rats and
mice.Sabourin PJ, Chen BT, Lucier G, Birnbaum LS, Fisher E, Henderson RF. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 87:325-336 (1987).
18. Differences in the metabolism and disposition of inhaled [3H]benzene by F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice. Sabourin
PJ, Bechtold WE, Birnbaum LS, Lucier G, Henderson RF. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 94:128-140 (1988).

3-25

4.1. Notion of Compartment .3
4.2. Theoretical Toxicokinetic Curves . 4
4.3. Elimination . 5
4.3.1. Mathematical forms of Elimination .6
4.3.2. The Mathematics of First-Order Elimination .7
4.3.3. Half-Life Determination . 7
4.3.4. Clearance . 9
4.4. Analysis of Toxicokinetic Curves . 9
4.4.1. Summary Characteristics of Zero-Order Elimination
.9
4.4.2. Summary Characteristics of First-Order Elimination
. 10
4.5. Toxicodynamics: drifting Elimination with Dose . 11
4.6. Multiple Compartments . 12
4.7. Multiple Exposures . 13
4.7.1. Repeated Exposure . 13
4.7.1.1. Plateau . 14
4.7.2. Simultaneous Exposures: N-in-1 . 15
4.8. Toxicokinetics Examples . 15
4.8.1. Doping . 15
4.8.2. Examples of Clinical Toxicokinetics . 17
4.8.2.1. Toxicokinetics in the Blood and Urine . 17
4.8.2.2. Toxicokinetics in the Lung . 18

4-1

4.

years ago. It arrived after the proliferation of cyanobacteria.
People did not invent pollution.it has been with us forever.
Living systems adapted to a point by, for example, integrating
mitochondria into their design. A shorter-term example is the
prevalence of hemoglobin S in Africa to counter malaria.
Extremely fast toxicodynamics is the development of drug
resistance in bacteria. Humans are adapted to their toxic
environment, but there is no doubt that the “design” can be
improved6.

Toxicological science is not explicitly concerned with the
difference between Toxication and Intoxication.
Toxication is the instantaneous toxic action resulting from the
action of a toxic agent at a given moment in time. Whereas
Intoxication refers to the effects of having been exposed to a
toxic substance. So,

In an animal model with null toxicodynamics, the animal
would not change as a result of intoxication. In this (unlikely)
case, it would be possible for a single animal to be exposed to
successively higher doses of a toxicant, and the experiments
would yield the same results as if many animals were exposed
to a range of single doses. In fact, the various manifestations of
a toxicant could be uncovered by monotonously increasing the
dose on a single animal.

t

In  toxication (t )   Toxication ( Agent Concentration) dt
0

This emphasis on Intoxication results from difficulties in the
practical measurement of Toxication.
Usually, time effects in Toxicology are dealt with using
indirect concepts such as categories of acute, sub-chronic and
chronic effects.
Further, the evolution over time of the agent (primarily, agent
concentration) is separated from the evolution of the organism
itself.

Toxicokinetics quantifies absorption, distribution and
elimination of an agent in an organism. It has the same basis as
clinical pharmacokinetics2, which monitors body burdens
(blood and tissue levels) and therapeutic benefits.
The ideal Toxicokinetics for a drug (achieving the ideal plasma
concentration) are not always easy to achieve. In the last 10
years, many oncology drugs have been approved which are in
fact only innovations in drug delivery: getting the proper
amount of medication into the proper compartment for the
proper time interval.

Toxicokinetics is a quantitative description of the tissue levels
of toxicants as a function of time in body compartments. It is
concerned with peak blood levels, half-lives, body burdens and
persistence of toxicants in organisms.
Toxicodynamics, a closely related field, investigates the
changes in an organism as a result of toxicant exposure.
Note that toxicodynamics also happens at the level of species,
through evolution. Species change their design as a result of
toxicant exposure.
2.5 billions years ago, there was no oxygen in Earth’s
atmosphere, and there was little in the oceans until 1 billion

Toxicokinetics is concerned with the duration and intensity of
toxic action by taking into account:

4-2

the persistence of the toxicant and its metabolites in
target organs,
the accumulation of the agent in storage sites (body
burden),
the rate of elimination of the toxicant.

in victims of intoxication. Optimal patient care needs
quantification of toxicant concentration for many agents:
acetaminophen, aspirin, ethylene glycol, methanol, ethanol,
iron and other metals, lithium, carboxyhemoglobin and
digoxin.

4.1. Notion of Compartment

The first step in toxicokinetics is to divide the human body into

A compartment is a part of the body with a uniform toxicant
concentration. Examples of compartments: blood, plasma,

1. a central compartment (usually, the blood together with
highly vascularized tissues), and
2. a certain number of peripheral compartments representing
body segments with common properties (F4.2). The
simplest model assigns to a single peripheral compartment
the organs that are more poorly vascularized.
The second step of toxicokinetics is to make assumptions about
the rate of elimination of the toxicant from the central
compartment, specifically zero order or first order
elimination (the models most commonly used).
F4.1. Clinical symptoms in
victims of methyl-mercury
poisoning in the Iraq
outbreak of 1971-72.
The solid line represents
blood levels based on intake
and the pharmacokinetics
of methyl-mercury. Dots
are actual observed blood
concentrations.

F4.2. Concentration of an agent in body compartments after injection
into the blood (central square). Rapid equilibration between blood and
Central compartment (short arrows) is already achieved before the beginning
of the graph. The curves show equilibration between Central and Peripheral
compartments, as well as elimination from the Central compartment. There is a
route of escape from the central compartment only (kelim, due to bladder,
gastro-intestinal tract, lungs). There are rate constants to and from the
peripheral compartment but no escape route, indicating that what goes out to
the peripheral compartment (adipose tissue, bones) must be released back into
the bloodstream for transfer to the central compartment.

Basis of Toxicity Testing, 1997.

Toxicokinetics is of
great clinical usefulness
in predicting the
evolution of symptoms

Basis of Toxicity Testing, 1997.

4-3

stomach, bone, liver, extracellular fluid, mitochondrial volume,
bound with albumin, etc. Almost anything can be a
compartment, but the choice of modeled compartments
depends on the properties of the toxicant.
Early studies used one or two "abstract" compartments (even if
they had no physical reality) to describe the evolution of
molecular concentrations over time. Now, the fashion is to use
physiologically meaningful compartments of individual organs
(intracellular, extracellular, alveolar space). Unfortunately, the
basic data needed to set-up such models is often missing,
partial or approximate.

Elimination (“phase”).
When a toxicant is eliminated from a single compartment
model (F4.3a), one mostly observes agent elimination
(“phase”) in the data. The absorption phase is vanishingly
short, since the agent was administered directly into the blood,
and there is no distribution, since there is only one

BODY FLUID VOLUMES (8, 29 AND 63%)

Although a compartment has a single concentration of a
toxicant, the value usually drifts over time. An exposure
generally results in the appearance of the agent in the
bloodstream, but it usually does not remain there exclusively,
as it is drawn out of the blood into other compartments.
In F4.2, an agent injected into the blood is rapidly equalized in
the central compartment made up of highly perfused tissues
(this process is too fast to be shown in the graph). The blood
level in the central compartment thereafter declines, indicating
distribution into the peripheral compartment made up of the
less vascularized tissues such as skin, muscle, adipose tissue
and bone.

F4.3. Intravenous administration of a drug in a
One- (a) and Two- (b) compartment model.
Modified from Scientific American Medicine.

4.2. Theoretical Toxicokinetic Curves

compartment. The concentration differences between tissue,
plasma and organ are due to the partition coefficient between
the regions. Toxicokinetics based on blood analysis gives the
investigator a way to predict future levels of the agent in the
blood of the victim, but not in the target organs, unless the
partition coefficient is known for all metabolites.

Three important phenomena can be displayed in toxicokinetic
curves (F4.3b): Absorption, Distribution (“phase”) and

When elimination is from a two-compartment model (F4.3b),
the toxicant rises instantly to its maximum value in plasma,
4-4

since it is injected. After reaching its peak in the blood (time
0), it is rapidly equilibrated between plasma and central
compartment (blue asterisk).
After the peak concentration in the central compartment, the
central and plasma variables are essentially the same, except
for the influence of the partition coefficient.
Tissues, however, equilibrate more slowly, reaching a
maximum later (red asterisk). After the tissue peak (red
asterisk), all rates of decay are parallel. Before the red asterisk
is the absorption and distribution phase, or  phase, and after
the red asterisk is the elimination phase, or  phase.
The half-life of the drug changes during the  phase and is
constant during the phase.
The phase may last for a few minutes, or for days or longer,
depending on the speed of exchange of toxicant between
plasma-central compartments and tissues.
Of interest to pharmacologists is whether the central
concentration of a drug reaches a high enough value for a long
enough period so that it is efficant.

4.3. Elimination
Some biological fluids are available for sampling without using
invasive techniques: exhaled air, urine, feces5. The data points
on the right of curve of F4.3b correspond to pure elimination of
the agent from the body.
The long-term excretion of a compound localized in a body
storage site (adipose tissue, bone) is generally a slow process
of equilibrium between the depot and the blood. Once the agent
is in the blood (central compartment), metabolism and
excretion (urinary, fecal, exhaled air) often occur, no
elimination generally occurring from the peripheral
compartment.
Examples of slowly eliminated compounds are PCBs, DDT
and lead. When elimination of toxicants is very slow,
elimination (particularly of heavy metals) can sometimes be
improved by the administration of chelators: for example. the
slow elimination of lead can be accelerated by EDTA chelation
(T4.4).
Metal

Elimination and some aspects of biotransformation can
readily be measured by sampling urine, feces, exhaled air and
carrying out chemical analyses for the agent and its
biotransformation products. Storage cannot be measured
conveniently, requiring invasive and frequently unpleasant
techniques to secure appropriate samples.
In the case of heavy metals or halogenated hydrocarbons such a
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), the amount circulating in
the bloodstream at any one time may represent only a small
fraction of the body burden. 95% of lead body burden is stored
in bone.

Arsenic
Cobalt
Copper
Iron
Lead
Mercury

T4.4. Chelators of Heavy Metals
Chelator

Meso, 2,3-dimercapto-succinic acid (DMSA)
2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonic acid (DMPS)
Dimercaprol (BAL)
D-penicillamine (PCN)
N-acetly-L-cysteine (NAC)
Ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)
DMSA, DMPS, PCN,
Trientine dihydrochloride (Trien)
Deferoxamine (DFO), Deferiprone (Li)
DMSA, EDTA, BAL, PCN
DMPS, DMSA, BAL, PCN

Another prominent chelator is DMSA. 20% of orally
administered DMSA (10 mg per kg every eight hours for five
4-5

4.3.1. Mathematical forms of Elimination

days) is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. One of the
sulfhydryls in DMSA binds to a cysteine molecule on
albumin, leaving the other S-H to chelate metals. DMSA
produces the best urinary excretion of mercury, greatest in the
first eight to 24 hours after ingestion, and is effective at
removing mercury from the blood, liver, brain, spleen, lungs,
large intestine, skeletal muscle and bone. DMSA has removed
two-thirds of the brain mercury deposits in animal studies.
Quantitatively, elimination of the toxicant may proceed by
various methods:
(0) a fixed weight of the toxicant per unit time. This is “zeroorder” or saturation kinetics, because the exponent of
Toxicant concentration = 0,
(1) a fixed percentage of the central compartment content per
unit time, or so-called “first order”,
(2) or the elimination can be even higher order (concentration
squared is pictured in F4.5), reflecting facilitated
elimination at higher toxicant concentrations.
Toxicokinetic Decays of Zero, 1st and 2nd Orders

Zero Order
60
1st Order
40
20
2nd Order
0
4

6

TIME

8

10

Log of Toxicant Concentration

Toxicant Concentration

80

2

Elimin. rate = k0 [Toxicant]0 + k1 [Toxicant]1 + k2 [Toxicant]2 +.
(mg/hour)

Let us consider 3 particular cases of elimination…
ZERO-ORDER: If k1 and k2 = 0,
Elimination rate = k0
(mg/hour)

The elimination per unit time is then simply a constant equal to
k0, that is a fixed amount of compound is eliminated for each
unit of time. Elimination is independent of toxicant
concentration, since the exponent of [Tox] is 0.
FIRST-ORDER: If k0 and k2 = 0,
Elimination rate = k1 [Toxicant]
(mg/hour)

Toxicokinetic Decays of Zero, 1st and 2nd Orders

100

0

(kx are the Elimination Rate constants; [ ] denotes a concentration)

100

The elimination rate is proportional to the first
power of toxicant concentration, ie [Tox] 1.
The concentration of toxicant is proportional to the elimination
rate.

Zero Order
2nd Order

1st Order

10

1
0

2

4

6

8

10

TIME

ZERO and FIRST-ORDER: If k2 and higher terms = 0,
Elimination rate = k0 + k1 [Toxicant]
(mg/hour)

F4.5. Zero-order and First-order decays are most frequent in toxicity
studies, First-order usually succeeding Zero-order. By converting
concentrations (µg/ml) into logarithmic values, the curves at right are
obtained from the curves at left. In the log graph at right, Zero-order
decay is curvilinear, and First-order decay linear.

Many processes are first detected as “zeroorder”, and then morph into “first-order” as
time passes and toxicant concentration
decreases (F4.8).

4-6

4.3.2. The Mathematics of First-Order
Elimination
If the rate of elimination of a toxicant from the body is directly
proportional to its concentration, this is expressed
mathematically as the “linear first-order homogenous
differential equation” shown below.
The derivative (d) of [Tox] with respect to time (dt) is equal to
a constant (k) times the concentration itself [Tox].
d [Tox]
 k [Tox] .
dt
“k” determines the speed of elimination (relative change in
toxicant concentration per unit time and concentration), the
minus sign in front of it signals a decrease in concentration
with time. By moving factors in the equation above and
integrating, we obtain
d [Tox]
 [Tox]    k dt , or ln [Toxt] - ln [Tox 0] = - k t.
The equation above allows us to find the concentration of the
toxicant at any time, [Tox t], if we know what the concentration
was at t = 0, [Tox 0].

F4.6. Half-life [t1/2 or 1/2] determination in the -phase.

Graphically, this means that the slope of the curve (term at left)
is negative (decreasing values of concentration) and is a
constant (k/2.303), yielding a straight line, such as at the right
of F4.6.

If we prefer to use common (base 10, log), rather than natural
(base e, ln) logarithms, the equation transforms as
log10 [Tox t] - log10 [Tox 0] = - k t / 2.303

4.3.3. Half-Life Determination
Half-Life can be evaluated only during First-order elimination
or beta ( -phase, as shown in F4.6.
A value, known as the ß-half-life (ßt/2) can be found from the
slope of the straight blue segment. The ßt/2 is the time required
to deplete the compartment (usually the blood) of 50 percent of
the agent.

log 10 [Toxt ]  log 10 [Tox0 ]
k

t
2.303

The expression above indicates that if we plot the log of
toxicant concentration, then the fall in concentration between
time 0 and time t divided by the elapsed time t is equal to a
constant.
4-7

To find the numerical value of ½, we need to equal expression
(1) (with points 1 and 2 chosen on the straight segment on the
curve) to the rightmost part of expression (2), as shown below:

If we assume that the concentration [Tox] is reduced in half at
the half-life, the following equation holds:
Tox0
log 10 [
]  log 10 [Tox0 ]
k
2
, or

½
2.303
Tox0


2.303  log10 [
]  log10 [Tox0 ] 
2

 , or
½  
k

½ 

log[ Tox2 ]  log[ Tox1 ]

½ 

2.303   log10 2 
, or
k
0.693
.
½ 
k
This equation relates the observed half-life to the elimination
constant, k.
In practice, using experimental data, the half-life of a
compound can be found from any two points (“1” and “2”)
which are part of a straight line on a log-linear curve.

½  

Slope on log  linear graph 

 log 2  (t 2  t1 )

or

 0.301  (t 2  t1 )
.
log[ Tox2 ]  log[ Tox1 ]

Log-linear tracings are indispensable for easy visualization of
elimination rates. Such tracings are obtained through plotting
software or, if manual plotting is preferred, log-linear paper.
Such paper can be generated through a printer by software
(Graph Paper Printer 4.21 for Windows, DVD Drive:\Graph
Paper Program) or by using the sheets supplied at the end of
this text.
The formalism above should not obscure the fact that halflives can usually be found easily by simple curve inspection
on a log-linear graph, or by simply inspecting the values of
a table.

log[ Tox2 ]  log[ Tox1 ]
(1)
t 2  t1

[Tox1] and [Tox2] represent blood concentrations and t1, t2 the
times at which these concentrations were observed.

Follow these steps:
1. Delimit a straight segment on the log-linear curve.
2. On this segment, find two concentrations that are a factor
of 2 apart (ie, 10 and 5).
3. The time interval between these two concentrations is the
half-life.
This simple method should be used to verify calculations.
Since many compounds can be stored effectively in relatively
inaccessible body compartments with an exceedingly slow

Applying the above formula to the specific time interval t 2
which follows t 1 by one half life [½ ] and reduces [Tox1] to
half its value:
 Tox1 
log 
 log[Tox1 ]
 log 2
2 

(2)
Slope over one half  life 

t1  ½  t1
½

4-8

release of the agent, half-lives in humans can be years.
For example the PCBs stored in our fat have elimination times
that increase as the PCB concentrations decreases. Even if our
exposure stopped tomorrow, we would all still die with a
measurable body burden of PCBs.
4.3.4. Clearance
A good example of a first-order elimination concept often used
in medicine is clearance. Clearance in ml/min is the volume of
fluid that is totally cleared of the toxicant per minute.
If a chemical is not reabsorbed at all by the kidney, the
clearance is equal to the glomerular filtration rate.
This is true of inulin and mannitol, used as test substances for
glomerular filtration rate determinations.
If the substance is actively secreted, the clearance can be
greater than the glomerular filtration rate.
A convenience of clearance is that it is additive between
organs such as kidneys, liver, intestine, etc…
Clearance is of critical importance in recognizing kidney
diseases in the clinic.
F4.7 (lower) shows how two compounds administered in the
same amount can have their clearance determined by
continuous measurement of the plasma concentration of the
substance.

4.4. Analysis of Toxicokinetic Curves
4.4.1. Summary Characteristics of Zero-Order
Elimination
1. Rate of elimination is a constant, independent of the
amount of toxicant present in the body.
2. Quantity of Toxicant in the tissues decreases by a constant
amount per unit time (mg/hour).
3. Linear plot of Toxicant concentration yields a straight line.

F4.7. Practical determination of clearance.

4-9

4. Toxicant half-life concept is inapplicable.

concentrations decrease.
This is explained as follows. In the initial stages of high level
intoxications, stored reserves of conjugation products are used
very rapidly, thereafter leaving the elimination process to work
only with conjugation products that must be synthesized de
novo. This limits the speed of elimination to a zero-order
process. As concentrations diminish, conjugation products
again become plentiful and diffusion, rather than conjugation
product availability, becomes limiting.

4.4.2. Summary Characteristics of First-Order
Elimination
1. Rate of elimination is proportional to the amount of
toxicant present in the body.
2. Quantity of Toxicant in the tissues decreases by a constant
fraction per unit time (% / hour).
3. Semi-log plot of Toxicant concentration yields a straight
line.
4. Toxicant half-life is independent of the dose.

F4.8. Zero to first order
kinetics.

An elimination process limited by bio-synthesis (such as Phase
II biotransformation), may be 0-order if the conjugation
product is produced by the body at a fixed rate. The liver has a
limited ability to synthesize the needed molecules, and
excretion can only proceed after conjugation.
Often, a zero-order elimination reflects a limit in liver biosynthesis or in the kidney’s active secretion capability.

The transition from
zero-order to firstorder occurs at the
Michaelis-Menten
constant
concentration (KM),
which is defined as
the toxicant
concentration at
which the velocity of
an enzyme reaction is half the maximal velocity.

However, if a process is limited by diffusion, one might
expect first-order kinetics, since a higher concentration
gradient of the agent will result in more toxicant transfer and in
more toxicant being processed, assuming no other limits.

When the concentration of a chemical in the body is
higher than KM, the rate of elimination is no longer
proportional to concentration (Zero-Order).
When the concentration of a chemical in the body is
smaller than KM, the rate of elimination is proportional
to concentration (First-Order).

Elimination in the kidney is typical of such a process. The
more toxicant enters the glomerulus, the more will be carried
away into the urine, assuming no further transport of the agent
across membranes.
Therefore, a first order elimination often reflects a process of
elimination governed by passive elimination by the kidneys.
Many elimination curves are first "zero-order" and then
morph into "first-order", as time passes and toxicant
4-10

4.5. Toxicodynamics: drifting Elimination
with Dose
A further complexity is introduced in the process of
elimination by the fact that the elimination rate in the beta
phase can change with the dose administered.
The same agent can display different half-lives at various
doses, as shown below for the herbicide, 2,4,5-T.
2,4,5-T is a highly polar organic anion that does not undergo
extensive storage, is not bio-transformed in the body, but is
eliminated via the kidney by both glomerular filtration (the
major route) and active secretion through the cells in the
proximal tubule of the nephron.
Essentially, the straight curve segments show urine excretion,
with only one parameter of the ß-phase (elimination) in
operation.
The fact that at a given concentration in the blood, the half-life
of the chemical can show different values (slopes in F4.9)
indicates that the elimination process is altered by the dose
administered (Toxicodynamics). Therefore, the elimination
performance of the organism was altered by the drug.

F4.9. Plasma 2,4,5-T of rats following various single oral doses.
Basis of Toxicity Testing, 1997.

A particularly ingenious experiments is shown in F4.10
below, where 3 rats are left to metabolize chloroform (CHCl3)
inside a closed cavity. The “biomonitoring” is achieved by
simply measuring the concentration of chloroform in the
atmosphere of the cavity. As the dose of chloroform increases
in various separate experiments, we can see the transition from
First-Order to Zero order elimination, reflecting a likely
saturation of Phase II synthesis.
F4.10. Disappearance of chloroform from a chamber
containing three rats.

4-11

4.6. Multiple Compartments
Many exposures are of the repeated (hourly, daily, weekly) or
extended (years) variety, the level at any one time being
insufficient to cause any overt toxicity. Successive exposures
add to the body burden, with adverse effects perhaps appearing
in the future.

A one compartment model is typical of the case when blood
and body organs reach equilibrium rapidly between them for
toxicant concentration: a single compartment is therefore
representative of the whole body, and excretion proceeds from
this single compartment.
In many cases (such a lead, or any lipophilic chemical), a
single compartment is not enough, and one must resort to two
or multiple compartments, with elimination proceeding (in
most implementations) from a central compartment that is
dynamically connected for toxicant exchange with other
compartments, as shown in F4.11.
Toxicokinetic computerized models can become very complex
with a multitude of compartments, as shown in F4.12.
But models of such complexity usually have limited usefulness
"in the field"1.

Calcium illustrates the importance of compartments. Living
cells maintain an intracellular environment that is markedly
different from the surroundings. Sodium chloride, abundant
outside the cell, is poisonous inside the cell. But few things
are as poisonous as calcium: molecule for molecule, it is
many times more poisonous than cyanide. Both sodium and
calcium are therefore vigorously pumped out of the cell. To
eliminate calcium, many cells render it insoluble by
combining it with carbon dioxide to form extracellular
calcium carbonate. This can be discarded or used as armour,
or various forms of structural support (i.e. a skeleton).

F4.11. Two compartments, two elimination routes. Vc = Central
Compartment (highly perfused, equilibrating within a few minutes), Vt
= Tissue Compartment. Horizontal arrows are individual rate
constants between plasma and tissues. Tissues in compartment 2 reach
equilibrium with plasma at different rates, but these are sufficiently
similar to be modeled by a single constant (pair of larger horizontal
arrows). The surface of the tissues in this representation corresponds to
the amount of drug contained in this tissue. Vertical arrows show
elimination from both compartments. Scientific American Medicine.

4-12

F4.13. Repeated exposure. The black curve represents two
administrations of the standard form of a drug, while the blue
represents the slow-release form. Note the linear vertical axis.
Scientific American Medicine.

F4.12. Complex models for Phenobarbital and Benzene toxicity. Qs are
blood flows (li/hr), Cs are concentrations (mg/li), Ks are elimination
constants. Compartments that are diffusion-limited are separated in
two, reflecting the fact that blood-borne movement of the toxicant is
much faster than membrane crossing. Casarett & Doull.

4.7. Multiple Exposures
4.7.1. Repeated Exposure
Depending on the time interval between exposures, the subject
may have had sufficient time to eliminate the earlier dose, but
in many cases, there is a cumulation of the doses, leading to a
climbing body burden.
As the concentration approaches the critical limit in the target
locations, signs and symptoms of intoxication will appear in
subjects. The signs and symptoms may reduce when people are
protected from exposure, such as during the weekend.

F4.14. Accumulation of body burden in the therapeutic administration
of digoxin. A 0.125 mg digoxin tablet is administered daily to a 65-year
old woman, 70 kg, treated for atrial flutter-fibrillation. Bioavailability
is 0.65. Estimated half-life based on renal function is 100 hrs, and
clearance is 2.1 liters/hr. Note the linear vertical axis.
Scientific American Medicine.

4-13

4.7.1.1. Plateau

The TIME TO ATTAIN A PLATEAU in the blood
concentration is determined as four to five half-lives of the
agent (see F4.15). The half-life (½) is inversely proportional
to the rate of elimination, but is normally independent of the
level of the exposure.

If one systematically exposed a subject to successive doses of
an agent, retaining the assumptions that the -half-life remains
unchanged, the rising plasma concentrations would allow the
subject to excrete more and more of the drug, until his
excretion balances his intake.
After a certain number of exposures, we approach a "plateau",
the blood concentration oscillating up and down during and
after exposure but, within limits, remaining relatively constant.

The CONCENTRATION AT PLATEAU is dependent on the
level of the exposure, the exposure interval and the  ½
(F4.15).

An exposure scenario familiar to physicians who want to
obtain high therapeutic blood levels of an agent early is to give
an initial large dose (bolus) followed by lower, maintenance
dosage.

F4.16. Repeated exposures lead to plateaus of toxicant concentrations
which are influenced by altered  ½.

Example: We consume some 50 micrograms of Cadmium in
our food each day (ubiquitous in its environmental
distribution). Cadmium has a biological half-life (not blood
half-life) of approximately 7 years. If one determines body
burdens of Cd, there is considerable variability until one
reaches 35 years of age, at which time, if there is no additional

F4.15. Factors influencing blood concentrations under
repeated identical exposures to toxicants. Assumes that the
½ does not alter with increasing concentration of agent in
the body. Basis of Toxicity Testing, 1997.

4-14

source of exposure (industrial), the body burden becomes
relatively constant.

pharmacokinetic parameters in animal models such as the rat,
the dog and even some in vitro models (Caco-2 cell model)
invest a lot of money obtaining concentration vs time profiles.

An illustration of the influence of ½ in repeated exposures is
shown in F4.16, where the time needed to attain maximum
concentration in the blood, as well as the plateau reached are
altered.

The N-in-l technique was introduced to reduce testing costs. It
involves the oral or intravenous co-administration of
multiple drug candidates into a single model and their separate
analysis over time using gas chromatography and high
performance liquid chromatography.

In F4.16 left, the organism reacts similarly in excretion
performance, irrespective of the dose. Three different
continuous exposures with a ½ of 6 hours all attain their
plateau at 24 hours, and the blood level attained at 20 exposure
“units” is 4-fold higher than that at 5 “units”.

The N-in-l strategy is capable of significantly speeding
determinations, using a fraction (1/N) of the animal resources.
Data show pharmacodynamic profiles similar to those obtained
for compounds in individual dosing.
Of course, compounds that can be converted to one another
should not form part of a simultaneous pool. Even though there
are some risks associated with the N-in-1 method, they can be
minimized by careful selection of the N-in-1 pool.

In F4.16 right, the organism excretes less effectively with
increasing dose. As a result, ½ increases (6, 18 and 30 hr) with
the exposure level (5, 10, 20 units), and the time to attain the
plateau shifts from 24 hr to 72 hr to 120 hr.
The stable blood concentrations attained are not “proportional”
to dose (the gap is indicated by the blue-red arrows).

4.8. Toxicokinetics Examples

In workplace hygiene, toxicokinetic calculations may
occasionally adjust the exposure standard (uniformly set for 8
hours) if unusual work schedules are involved. Calculation can
be performed based on the number of hours worked each day,
the number of hours worked each week, and the half-life of the
agent. Adjustments are not required for agents with a half-life
less than 3 hours (Short-Term Exposure and Ceiling Limits
take over) or exceeding 400 hours7.

4.8.1. Doping
The elimination of drugs from the blood and urine is a central
variable in the evaluation of doping. In the table below, Drug
Detection Times are expressed in terms of lower and upper
boundaries. Many factors determine an individual's placement
within these boundaries. In general, the following factors will
increase a drug's detection time: chronic use, high levels of use,
high drug potency, high urine pH, slow body metabolism, high
body fat count (for Marijuana and PCP), low fluid intake, and
overall poor health.

4.7.2. Simultaneous Exposures: N-in-1
Pharmaceutical companies looking for drugs with desired

4-15

T4.17. Drug Detection Times from Drug Test Success

In the case of hexacarbon neuropathy, a certain body burden of nhexane is required to produce the characteristic central and peripheral
distal axonopathy, and the neuronal damage is advanced before the
diagnosis can be confirmed.
Removal of the individual from the exposure site frequently results not
in a lessening of the signs and symptoms, but in a worsening of the
condition, much to the horror of the attending physician, who now
doubts the accuracy of his diagnosis.
What should be appreciated is that it is not n-hexane that is toxic, but a
biotransformation product. The body burden of the agent must be
eliminated via this metabolic route, and so toxicity remains for about
two weeks, during which the symptoms may remain stable or become
more pronounced. They only begin to subside later. Depending upon the
severity of the neurological damage, the patient may recover
completely, make a partial recovery or remain permanently
incapacitated.

Alcohol
Amphetamines
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Cocaine
LSD

Marijuana

MDMA (Ecstasy)
Mescaline
Methadone
Methamphetamines
Methaqualone
Nicotine
Opiates

6 hours to 1 day
1 to 4 days
Short-acting (Allobarbital, Alphenal, Amobarbital, Aprobarbital, Butabarbital,
Butalbital, Butethal, Pentobarbital, Secobarbital): 1 to 4 days
Long-acting (Barbital, Phenobarbital): 2 to 3 weeks
Short-term Therapeutic Use: 3 days
Long-term Chronic Use: 4 to 6 weeks
2 to 5 days
1 to 4 days
Casual Use: up to 7 days
Chronic Use: up to 30 days or longer
Note: THC, Marijuana's primary psychoactive ingredient, is stored by the
body in fatty lipid tissue. From there, it is slowly released into the
bloodstream and urine for up to several weeks. Chronic users and individuals
with high body fat count are at the greatest risk of long-term detection.
1 to 4 days
1 to 4 days
1 to 7 days
1 to 4 days
up to 14 days
1 to 2 days
1 to 4 days

Casual Use: up to 7 days
PCP (Phencyclidine)

Propoxyphene
Psilocybin (Mushrooms)
Steroids (Anabolic)
Tricyclic Antidepressants

4-16

Chronic Use: up to 30 days
Note: PCP is stored by the body in fatty lipid tissue. From there, it is slowly
released into the bloodstream and urine for up to several weeks. Chronic users
and individuals with high body fat count are at the greatest risk of long-term
detection.
1 to 7 days
1 to 3 days
Oral: 2 to 3 weeks
Injected: 1 to 3 months
Naldrolene: up to 9 months
1 to 9 days

4.8.2. Examples of Clinical Toxicokinetics
4.8.2.1. Toxicokinetics in the Blood and Urine

Toxicants or their metabolites can be sampled from body gases,
body fluids or body tissues. Toxicants in exhaled gases are
often detectable only for relatively short periods after
intoxication, as is the case for alcohol. Therefore, one may
need to be present on the spot for useful sampling. Because of
this, and because of the discomfort of obtaining most body
tissues (with the exception of nails and hair), sampling is often
done using accessible body fluids, specifically urine and blood.
Sensitive and specific biomarkers are available for metals,
dioxins, furans, PCBs, pesticides, volatile organic compounds,
phthalates, phytoestrogens and tobacco smoke.
What classes of toxicants can we expect to find in either of
them?
Dioxins, PCBs and organochloride pesticides reside for months
or years in the body, either because they are metabolized
slowly or because they are hidden in lipophilic (fatty)
compartments. For example, the half-life of TCDD is 2–4 wks
in rodents, while it is approximately 10 yrs humans. These
properties tend to lower excretion rates.
Organophosphate pesticides, alcohol and volatile organic
compounds, on the other hand, reside in the body only for
hours or days, because they are metabolized quickly. They may
be favorite targets of enzymes, or enzymes may have good
access to them because they are not hidden in lipophilic
compartments. This tends to heighten excretion rates.

F4.18. Exposure to tobacco smoke is measured as blood (serum)
cotinine in this histogram. It clearly discriminates between smokers
and non-smokers. American Scientist, 2004
F4.19. Kinetics in urine.
Basis of Toxicity Testing, 1997.

Therefore, persistent chemicals
are often measured in blood,
while transient ones are
generally measured in urine.
Bio-transformation pattern is
also a factor, some compounds
(benzene) forming urinary
metabolites, while others do not
(dioxin).
F4.19 shows typical curves for
urine. In #1 (lower exposure), a first-order linear relationship,
where excretion half-life is dependent on an elimination
constant (kelim), not on the concentration of the chemical. In #2
4-17

(elevated exposure), the initial part of the relationship is
curvilinear, but becomes linear with time. The curved portion
represents saturation kinetics or a zero-order reaction
(excretion of a certain weight per unit time). Progressively, as
the concentration of agent diminishes, the mechanisms in the
renal nephron (active proximal tubular secretion) is no longer
saturated, and the elimination becomes first order (k[Tox]).
4.8.2.2. Toxicokinetics in the Lung
F4.20. Kinetics in the lung.
Basis of Toxicity Testing, 1997.

In the case of breathed volatiles3,4,
the lung is usually a relatively
efficient route of elimination. Loss of
the agent will frequently be observed
in the blood as an initial very steep,
first-order reaction (F4.20). We are
looking at an initial excretion of
circulating volatile chemical, plus
any loosely "compartmentalized"
agent (easily equilibrated back into
the blood), followed by a slow excretion of compartmentalized
(adipose tissue, etc.) chemical. Examples would include such
anesthetics as halothane and isoflurane, where initial postsurgical recovery is rapid, but the patient may continue to
exhale low levels of the agent for hours afterward.
REFERENCES
1. Absorption and distribution of xenobiotics. Standaert, F.G. Environ. Health Perspect. 77, 63-71, 1988.
2. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics for the clinician. Stanski, D.R. Can. J. Anaesth. 38, R48-R53, 1991.
3. Breath concentration as an index of the health risk from benzene. Berlin, M. et al. Scand. J. Work Environ. Health 6,
104-111, 1984.
4. n-Hexane metabolism in occupationally exposed workers.Mutti, A. et al Br. J. Indust. Med. 41, 533-538, 1984.
5. Uptake, distribution, metabolism and elimination of styrene in man. A comparison between single exposure and coexposure with acetone. Wigaeus, E. et al. Br. J. Indust. Med. 41, 539-546, 1984.
6. Lifespan extension in Caenorhabditis elegans by complete removal of food. Kaeberlein TL et al. Aging Cell. 2006 Dec;
5(6):487-94.
7. Application of Occupational Exposure Limits to Unusual Work Schedules Hickey, J.L., & Reist, P.C. (1977).
American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal. 38(11): 613-621.

4-18

5.1. Blood .2
5.1.1. Plasma Protein .3
5.1.1. Types of Blood Cells .3
5.1.2. Formation of Blood Cells .4
5.1.3. Blood Tests. 5
5.1.4. Natural Hematological Diseases . 8
5.1.4.1. Anemia . 8
5.1.4.2. Sickle Cell Anemia .9
5.2. Hematotoxicity . 9
5.2.1. Oxygen Transport .9
5.2.1.1. CO Interference with Oxygen Transport . 11
5.2.1.2. Chemical Attacks on Hb. 13
5.2.1.3. Exposure Examples . 15
5.2.1.4. The Genetics of Erythrocytic Hemolysis . 15
5.2.2. Metabolic Anoxia: Cyanide and H2S . 16
5.2.3. Alterations in Cellular Composition . 18
5.2.3.1. White Blood Cell Imbalances . 18
5.2.3.2. Thrombocytopenia . 18
5.2.3.3. Chemicals causing Thrombocytopenia . 18
5.2.3.4. Chemicals causing Hemolysis . 18
5.2.3.5. Chemicals causing Anemia-Pancytopenia . 18
5.2.3.6. Example: Lead Poisoning . 19
5.2.3.7. Example: Benzene Poisoning . 20

5.3. ImmunoToxicity . 21
5.3.1. Overview of the Immune system . 21
5.3.2. ImmunoToxicology . 21
5.3.3. Immune Bioactivation of Xenobiotics . 22
5.3.3.1. Immunosuppression. 22
5.3.3.2. Immune-Mediated Toxicity . 23
5.3.3.2.1. Hyersensitivity Reactions . 23
5.3.3.2.2. Autoimmune Reactions . 23
5.4. CardioToxicity . 23
5.4.1. Cardiac Physiology . 23
5.4.2. Chemicals causing Cardiac Toxicity . 24
5.4.2.1. Gases . 25
5.4.2.2. Alcohols/Aldehydes . 25
5.4.2.3. Heavy Metals . 26
5.4.2.4. Halogenated Alkanes/Alkenes . 26
5.4.2.5. Organic Nitrates . 27
5.5. Vascular Toxicity . 28
5.5.1. Atherosclerosis . 29
5.5.2. Agents Toxic to Blood Vessels . 29
5.5.2.1. Gases . 29
5.5.2.2. Heavy Metals . 29
5.5.2.3. Dust Particles . 29
5.5.2.4. Others. 29

5-1

5.
5.1. Blood

Insects carry oxygen in their body using diffusion through
internal air pipes. However, there is a critical insect size above
which diffusion is not effective enough.
In crabs and some fish, the blood
contains a free solution of
hemocyanin, which binds oxygen
using copper. It turns blue when
oxygenated, and has only 25 % of the
binding ability of mammalian
hemoglobin, the molecule sequestered
inside red blood cells for the purpose
of binding oxygen. Horseshoe crab
blood coagulates instantly when
contacting E. coli and Salmonella, providing a useful
diagnostic test.
5-2

There is only one vertebrate known to lack hemoglobin and red
blood cells: the blackfin icefish, Chaenocephalus aceratus. The
extremely high oxygen content of the Southern Ocean allowed
it to survive the loss of globin genes, and to rely on oxygen
dissolved in the plasma, a loss of 90 % in oxygen-carrying
capacity. The fish has a much larger heart, blood vessels and
volume of blood, and far denser capillary beds.

Mongooses, opossums and ground squirrels produce plasma
protein (protease inhibitors) that neutralize the venom of
snakes found in their habitat, showing an adaptive capability of
this detoxification mechanism.
5.1.1. Types of Blood Cells
The various cell types in the blood, erythrocytes, leucocytes or
platelets, are differently affected by various toxicants because
they are so different.
Leucocytes come in many forms, and the role of the various
forms is not completely known. T lymphocytes are involved in
many cellular activities that define “self” within the body (as

In mammals, an extensive capillary network supplies tissues
with oxygen and removes carbon dioxide throughout the body.
The difficulty of diffusion of oxygen and other nutrients
through tissues limits the gap between adjacent capillaries to
only 4 cell thicknesses.
Mammal-type circulation in an animal smaller than a shrew
would be inefficient because of blood flow friction in the tiny
capillaries.
5.1.1. Plasma Protein
Exogenous agents such as oxygen, once into the bloodstream,
may bind more or less loosely to plasma proteins (F5.2),
which affect distribution to the blood’s cellular components
and to perfused organs. Plasma protein can have a substantial
role in sequestering toxicants and in slowing their release to
body tissues, thereby attenuating toxic shocks.
Venoms are animal poisons evolved from saliva, that are
injected and distributed in the body by the victim’s circulation.
Hemotoxins from lizards attack blood vessel walls.
Stonustoxins from the stone fish and platypus create incredible
pain. Necrotoxins from spiders destroy flesh. Neurotoxins from
the black mamba paralyze victims. Myotoxins from rattle
snakes or sea snakes attack muscle specifically. Atraxotoxins
from funnel web spiders over-stimulate nerves. Cardiotoxins
from jellyfish attack the heart muscle. Batrachotoxins used on
arrow tips by some hunters induce total body system shutdown.
Antibodies are useful in treatment against these bio-molecules.

F5.2. Identification of 99 % of the protein found in plasma. Blood
contains one million different protein types, with abundances that span
12 orders of magnitude.

auto-immunity), while B lymphocytes produce anti-bodies that
tag foreign materials for destruction. Monocytes are immune
agents dispatched by the spleen and are the first responders to
trouble sites.
5-3

12

Even the comparatively simple red blood cells have their own
complexity. For example, erythrocyte blood types define
compatibility for transfusion,
according to the presence of A, B and
Rh antigens, but these characteristics
have little to do with hemotoxicity.

M) concentrations that can increase up to 1,000-fold during
trauma or infection. Some hormones are homeostatic control
systems that keep constant the concentration of hemoglobin.
Others function in a transient, pulsatile fashion, triggering
physiological entrainment (testosterone, cortisol, LH, FSH).
Neuro-transmitters could be seen as the ultimate short-term
controllers.

F5.3. Blood transfusion incompatibilities.
Scientific American.

5.1.2. Formation of Blood Cells
The 5 to 6 liters of blood in the human body originate from
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells or pluripotent stem cells
found primarily in the bone marrow (long bones, ribs, sternum)
and, in some species, in the spleen. These stem cells give rise
to erythrocytes, a series of "white" blood cells or leukocytes,
and thrombocytes or platelets (F5.4). Stem cell proliferation is
under the influence of specific cytokines (poietins) arising from
different tissues in response to changes in physiological status.
Cytokines have a major role in stabilizing blood cell
populations by stimulating the activity of cells, much like
hormones do.
The difference between hormones and cytokines is
circumstantial. Hormones circulate in nanomolar (10-9M)
concentrations that usually vary by less than one order of
magnitude. Cytokines (ex., IL-6) circulate in picomolar (10

RH FACTOR: antigens (agglutinogens) such as the Rh factor are
present on the surface of red blood cells, leading to incompatible blood
types.
An Rh- mother having her first Rh+ child is usually not a problem.
But on the second child, problems start to appear because she has developed
antibodies to the Rh factor, and the problems grow with each successive
child. In the newborn child, hemolysis can lead to anemia and even death.

F5.4. Blood cells types arising from pluripotent stem cells.
Silverthorn, 2004.

5-4

The supply of red blood cells in mammals is controlled by the
cytokine erythropoietin (EPO). Hypoxic conditions, anemia, or
the presence of cobalt ions will result in the release of
erythropoietin from the kidney to stimulate the production of
more erythrocytes. In contrast, hyperoxia or polycythemia will
inhibit (or shut down) the release of erythropoietin, decreasing
erythrocyte synthesis1. In physiological situations, the
concentration of EPO can change by 1000-fold. 2 million new
red blood cells per second are needed to maintain cell numbers
in the adult.
Any reduction in the populations of needed cells will induce an
attempt by humoral regulators to restore it. There are a large
number of such molecular regulators, which act on long
production chains for various needed cell types.

Labs set the normal result range for a particular test so that 95
% of healthy patients fall within. So, 5 % of healthy patients
fall outside of the “norm”. Statistically, if you have 20 or 30
individual tests run as part of a panel, chances are that 1 or 2
will be slightly outside the normal range. We briefly
summarize below the meaning of common blood variables for
human subjects.
Glucose: High values are associated with eating before the test,
and diabetes. The normal range for a fasting glucose is 60 -109
mg/dl. Diabetes is associated with a fasting plasma glucose of
126 or more. A precursor of diabetes, Impaired Fasting
Glucose (IFG) is defined as readings of fasting glucose levels
of 110 - 125. Sometimes a glucose tolerance test, which
involves giving a sugary drink followed by several blood
glucose tests, is necessary to properly sort out normal from IFG
from diabetes.

The stem cells are at the root of the tree (F5.4). Until recently,
it was assumed that many adult tissues had no stem cells and
that if they had, the stem cells could only reproduce the tissue
in which they resided. However, more recent evidence suggests
that stem cells from the bone marrow can form nerve, muscle
and other types on non-blood cells.
Implicit in this blood system, and probably in other body
systems, is asymmetrical division. Stem cells given rise to two
daughters, one of which replaces the mother, while the other
differentiates into granddaughters.

Potassium is controlled very carefully by the kidneys, critical
to the proper functioning of nerves and muscles, particularly
the heart. Any value outside the expected range, high or low,
requires medical evaluation. This is especially important if you
are taking a diuretic or heart medication (Digitalis, Lanoxin,
etc.).
Sodium is regulated by the kidneys and adrenal glands. There
are numerous causes of high and low sodium levels, but the
most common causes of low sodium are diuretic usage,
diabetes drugs like chlorpropamide, and excessive water intake
in patients with heart or liver disease.

5.1.3. Blood Tests
Blood tests are extensively used in evaluating the health status
of animals and humans. Laboratory results may be outside of
the normal range because of factors such as race, diet
preferences, age, sex, menstrual cycle, degree of physical
activity, improper collection and handling of the specimen,
non-prescription drugs (aspirin, cold medications,
vitamins, etc.), prescription drugs, alcohol intake, etc.

CO2 is intimately related to blood pH. Low CO2 levels can be
due to either increased acidity from uncontrolled diabetes,
5-5

kidney disease, metabolic disorders, or to chronic
hyperventilation.

amounts in the blood. If blood is not processed promptly and
properly, high levels may occur. If all values except LDH are
within expected ranges, it is probably a processing error and
does not require further evaluation.

Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN) is a liver waste product excreted
by the kidneys. High values may signal kidney disease. BUN is
also affected by high protein diets and strenuous exercise
which raise levels, and by pregnancy, which lowers it.

Bilirubin is a pigment removed from the blood by the liver.
Low values are of no concern. If slightly elevated above the
expected ranges, but with all other enzymes (LDH, GOT, GPT,
GGT) within expected values, it is probably an insignificant
condition known as Gilbert’s syndrome.

Creatinine is a waste product largely from muscle breakdown.
High values, especially with high BUN levels, indicate kidneys
problems.

Creatine PhosphoKinase is an enzyme useful for diagnosis of
heart and skeletal muscle diseases. This enzyme is the first to
be elevated after a heart attack (3 to 4 hours). If CPK is high in
the absence of heart muscle injury, this is a strong indication
of skeletal muscle disease.

Uric Acid is normally excreted in urine. High values are
associated with gout, arthritis, kidney problems and the use of
some diuretics.
AST, ALT, SGOT, SGPT, and GGT and Alkaline
Phosphatase are enzymes that may be released into the blood
following various forms of injury to muscles, liver and heart.
Alcohol and a number of diseases cause high values.
AST/SGOT, ALT/ SGPT are liver and muscle enzymes.
They may be elevated from liver problems, hepatitis, excess
alcohol ingestion, muscle injury and recent heart attack.
GGT is also elevated in liver disease, particularly with
obstruction of bile ducts. Unlike alkaline phosphatase, it is
not elevated with bone growth or damage.
Alkaline phosphatase is an enzyme found primarily in
bone and liver. Higher values are expected for growing
children and pregnant women, or when damage to bones or
liver has occurred, or with gallstones. Low values are
probably not significant.

Albumin and Globulin measure the amount and type of
protein in your blood. They are an index of overall health and
nutrition. Globulin is the "antibody" protein important for
fighting disease. A/G Ratio is the mathematical relationship
between the above.
Cholesterol is a fat-like substance associated with heart
disease. Less than 200 mg/dl is recommended.
Total Cholesterol: A high cholesterol level is a risk factor
for heart and atherosclerosis. 200 mg/dl or more are too high
and 240 and above are considered high risk. A low fat diet
and regular exercise are recommended. There are three
major kinds of cholesterol, High Density Lipoprotein
(HDL), Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL), and Very Low
Density Lipoprotein (VLDL).

LDH is an enzyme present in all cells in the body. Anything
which damages cells, including blood drawing itself, will raise
5-6

High LDL mark formation of deposits in the arteries. 100
mg/dl is ideal, less than 130 is recommended, greater than
160 is high risk.
High HDL is associated with low incidence of coronary
heart disease.
VLDL is another carrier of fat in the blood.

T3 Resin Uptake or Thyroid Uptake is not a thyroid test,
but measures the levels of proteins that carry thyroid
hormone in the bloodstream and is used to compute the free
thyroxine index. A high result indicates a low level of the
protein.
Free Thyroxine Index (FTI or T7) : A mathematical
computation allows the lab to estimate the free thyroxine
index from the T4 and T3 Uptake tests. Unlike the T4 alone,
it is not affected by estrogen levels.
Free T4: This test directly measures the free T4 in the blood
rather than estimating it like the FTI. It is a more reliable ,
but a little more expensive test. Some labs do the Free T4
routinely rather than the Total T4.
Total T3 is used when thyroid disease is evaluated. T3 is
the more potent and shorter lived version of thyroid
hormone. Some people with high thyroid levels secrete
more T3 than T4. In these (overactive) hyperthyroid cases
the T4 can be normal, the T3 high, and the TSH low.
Free T3: This test measures only the portion of thyroid
hormone T3 that is "free", that is, not bound to carrier
proteins.

Triglyceride is fat which, if elevated, has been associated with
heart disease and pancreatitis, especially if over 500 mg/dl.
Triglyceride levels over 150 mg/dl may be associated with
other problems.
Calcium in the blood is controlled by the parathyroid glands
and the kidneys. Calcium is found mostly in bone and is
important for proper blood clotting, nerve, and cell activity. An
elevated calcium can be due to medications such as thiazide
type diuretics, inherited disorders of calcium handling in the
kidneys, or excess parathyroid gland activity or vitamin D.
Low calcium can be due to insufficient parathyroid hormone or
drugs like Fosamax or furosemide type diuretics.
Phosphorus is also largely stored in the bone. It is regulated by
the kidneys, and high levels may be due to kidney disease.
When low levels are seen with high calcium levels, it suggests
parathyroid disease. A low phosphorus, in combination with a
high calcium, may suggest an overactive parathyroid gland.

Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH): This protein hormone
is secreted by the pituitary gland and regulates the thyroid
gland. A high level suggests your thyroid is under-active, and a
low level suggests your thyroid is overactive.

Thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3),
are easily measurable in the blood.
Thyroxine (T4) high levels may be due to hyperthyroidism,
however technical artifact occurs when estrogen levels are
higher from pregnancy, birth control pills or estrogen
replacement therapy. A Free T4 test (see below) can avoid
this interference.

Glycohemoglobin (Hemoglobin A1 or A1c, HbA1c) :
Glycohemoglobin measures the amount of glucose chemically
attached to your red blood cells. Since blood cells live about 3
months, it tells us your average glucose for the last 6 - 8 weeks.
A high level suggests poor diabetes control.

5-7

5.1.4. Natural Hematological Diseases
The major natural diseases of the blood are red blood cell
insufficiencies (anemias) and leukocyte proliferation
(leukemias).
F5.5 directly displays the hematocrit (% volume of red blood
cells) for various conditions, which is normally 40-54 % for
men and 37-47 % for women. Sports competitors may induce
artificial polycythemia (last tube in F5.5) by re-injecting their
stored blood cells before a competition.
5.1.4.1. Anemia

Anemia results from insufficient delivery of oxygen to body
tissues as a result of too few or defective red blood cells.
Chemical exposures can increase or decrease blood cell levels
because the marrow-based process of generation of blood
components is complex and delicate. Problems with red blood
cells are common even without intoxication:
 

Microcytic Hypochromic: too small RBCs from iron
deficiency or hemorrhage. This problem can also be
caused by lead exposure.

 

Megaloblastic Microcytic: too small RBCs from folic
acid or B12 deficiency.

 

Aplastic: too few RBCs because of a dysfunction of
blood forming systems.

Red blood cell destruction or fragility can result from genetic
diseases (sickle cells), malaria or chemical exposure.
F5.5. Appearance of blood in various diseases. Wintrobe, 1974.

5-8

Chemicals can induce anemia, in part because red blood cells
are exposed early to chemicals and have limited means of
metabolic defense.
In mammals, they lack a nucleus and mitochondria. They
produce ATP by anaerobic metabolism (glycolysis) because
mitochondria would use up the oxygen that RBCs are intended
to transport.
Damage to the erythrocytes may induce hemolysis.
Hemoglobin spilled into the plasma dissociates its four tightly
bound sub-units and causes kidney toxicity by precipitating in
the glomerulus. There is damage to the glomerular membrane,
hematuria and a gel-like precipitation in the tubular lumen, thus
impairing renal function. It also interacts toxically with a
number of other molecules throughout the body.

Destruction of red blood cells also impairs oxygen and carbon
dioxide transport. The result is hypoxemia (insufficient supply
of oxygen to tissues) and secondary toxicity in tissues which
require large supplies of oxygen (CNS, heart).
5.1.4.2. Sickle Cell Anemia

Sickle cell anemia is a relatively common genetic condition,
that amplifies problems related to oxygen insufficiency. It is
thought to result from an adaptation giving immunity against
malaria. The sickle mutation increases a protein, heme
oxygenase-1, which increases CO concentrations. The binding
of CO to heme reduces the toxicity that occurs when heme is
released into the blood, as erythrocytes desintegrate25.
The sickle cell transition is due to the spontaneous
crystallization of the variant HbS, triggered by low oxygen
atmospheres.
It appears that specific molecules on the deformed cells make
them stickier than healthy red blood cells, contributing to
painful sickle crises. Sickle cells are normally eliminated by
the spleen. The condition is most prevalent in black women.
Individuals that are homozygous for HbS are not usually in the
workforce. Individuals that are heterozygous show almost no
impairment in most situations. It may be appropriate to screen
in special cases such as operation of aircraft and submarines.
Genetic trials in rats aimed at correcting sickle cell disease
have been successful12.

5.2. Hematotoxicity
5.2.1. Oxygen Transport
The erythrocyte has a simpler metabolism than normal cells.
There is no glycogen in the erythrocyte, therefore, glucose

F5.6. Sickle cell transformation. Wintrobe, 1974.

5-9

attachment of the Fe2+ is an imidazole group of the protein
globin, which leaves one bond free for the oxygen (F5.7).
Heme is a porphyrin chelate of iron in which the iron is Fe2+,
the oxygen-carrying, color-furnishing, non-protein part of Hb.
In the disease called porphyria, mutated enzymes manufacture
defective heme, which builds up to toxic levels.
The performance of Hb as an oxygen carrier is described by the
oxygen saturation curve of blood. The curve defines the
volume of oxygen released under various partial pressures of
gaseous oxygen (F5.8). In order to prevent hypoxia in distal
tissues, Hb loses its affinity for oxygen when the oxygen
pressure is low.
Hemoglobin was originally a detoxification molecule used by
simple animals as a defense against the oxygen "pollution"
from plants. For example, the hemoglobin of Ascaris
lumbricoides (a worm living in low oxygen environments)
binds oxygen 25,000 more tightly than human Hb. Myoglobin
in muscle has an even stronger affinity for oxygen than
hemoglobin, making oxygen delivery to muscle tissues
possible.
It has been demonstrated experimentally that there are
alternative fluids to hemoglobin that can carry enough
dissolved oxygen to sustain life (F5.9).

must be available from the blood. It is metabolized by two
routes: the Embden-Meyerhof pathway (anaerobic) and the
pentose phosphate pathway (aerobic).
Routine detoxification of free radicals in the erythrocyte is
heavily dependent on glutathione (page 3-19).

F5.7. Views of hemoglobin. Left, the complete molecule where the
protein subunits are in red and blue, and the iron-containing heme
groups in green. Right, the oxygen binding site (heme).

The erythrocyte carries carbon dioxide away from tissues. A
small amount is carried in free solution, 75 % is transported as
bicarbonate ion (HCO3-) converted by the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase (a soluble enzyme in the intracellular fluid), the
balance of the carbon dioxide is combined with free amino
groups in the globin to form carbamino (R-NH-COOH).

Without oxygen, animal metabolic pathways end up with
excessive lactic acid. Turtles can cope with large amounts of
lactic acid because they neutralize it using the calcium
carbonate in their shell. Carps and goldfish can convert lactic
acid to ethanol, which can be released from their gills15.

30 % of the erythrocyte is made of the protein hemoglobin.
Hemoglobin (Hb) is responsible for the transport of oxygen,
attaching it to a ferrous (Fe2+) ion which is held in position via
chelating bonds to porphyrin ring N-groups. One free

5-10

F5.9. A rat breathing perfluorocarbons.

0.07 % CO can be lethal. Another effect
of CO at 0.1 % is to alter the
Dissociation-Saturation curve of Hb, as shown in F5.8.
Saturation of Hb with CO inhibits oxygen transport by binding
less oxygen more tightly: in the graph, a depression of 90 mm
Hg in oxygen pressure (as opposed to 60 mm) is necessary to
release 5 ml of oxygen.
The symptoms of CO poisoning are low blood pressure,
fainting, dizziness, headache, weakness and nausea.
In a Toxicokinetic application, canaries have been used as
warning devices to protect the health of miners, since coal
mines are likely to contain pockets of CO. A canary is small,
its metabolism is high, and it has a high breathing rate.
Therefore, it will be in equilibrium with CO much faster than a
human, and should serve as a warning for humans to leave the
tunnel. However, the binding of CO to canary Hb is only 110
times (not 225) stronger than that of oxygen. Because of this, it
is possible that the miner will die before the canary, usefully
warning the canary to get out of the mine shaft. Therefore
canaries as a warning device are only effective above 0.2 %
CO.
Because the CO2 chemo-receptors that increase respiration rate
are not affected by CO poisoning, the lack of O2 concentration
into the tissues is not noticed until too late.

F5.8. Saturation curve of blood with air and CO.
Atmospheric air has 160 mm Hg of O2.
Modified from Williams and Burson, 1985.

5.2.1.1. CO Interference with Oxygen Transport

Carbon monoxide binds Hb 225 times more strongly than O2,
as shown in the equation below, where M = 225 and the Ps
represent partial pressures. In the presence of CO, therefore,
less Hb is available to carry oxygen.
5-11

oxygen should be the treatment of choice for seriously
poisoned people to prevent memory lapses, confusion and
language problems.
In the weeks following their poisoning by CO, some survivors
develop concentration problems, personality changes or
sensory impairments. These effects can be traced to misguided
immune responses to a brain protein, myelin basic protein, that
is altered by CO gas14.
CO binds mitochondrial enzymes and myoglobin, increases
platelet stickiness and decreases arrhythmia thresholds.
Methylene Chloride is a solvent used in degreasing and paint
stripping which is absorbed by respiration or through the skin,
and is metabolized in the blood to CO. It may elevate COHb to
10 % or more in poorly ventilated spaces. It is also a
carcinogen.
F5.10. Effects of Carbon Monoxide on Man and Canaries.
Ann. Occup. Hyg. 5: 1961.

 

 
 

Carboxyhemoglobin (CO-Hb)
Individuals with previous coronary artery disease may
develop angina with moderate activity at levels as low
at 3-5 %.Cigarette smokers are chronically around 5 %.
Exposure of 35 ppm CO for 10 hours is equivalent to 5
%.
Cardiac compensatory effects seen at 8-10 %: heart
attack, lightheadedness, chest pain.
Electrocardiogram problems (extrasystoles, premature
ventricular contractions, fibrillation) at 10-25 %.

Treatment: Carboxyhemoglobin pressure can be lowered by
breathing oxygen through a mask for a few hours. It also
combats nausea, headache and loss of consciousness
commonly experienced by victims. However, hyperbaric

F5.11. Spectrums of Hemoglobin. Modified from Wintrobe, 1974.

5-12

5.2.1.2. Chemical Attacks on Hb

METHYLENE BLUE
Methylene blue is an artificial dye first used as a marker in studying bacteria
and body tissues. Methylene blue, which can be taken by mouth or injected
intravenously, imparts a blue color to urine and feces.
It is also an antiseptic (disinfectant), although its bactericidal properties are
very mild, and a mild urinary antiseptic and stimulant to mucous surfaces.
It has been used as an antiseptic in urinary tract infections and as an indicator
dye to detect certain compounds present in urine. Methylene Blue has also
been shown to minimize the occurrence of kidney stones, and may prevent
their formation.
Its present uses are for its oxidation-reduction functions (methemoglobin
regeneration to hemoglobin), tissue staining, and as an anti-aging drug.
Methylene Blue activates a normally dormant reductase enzyme system
which reduces the Methylene Blue to leucomethylene blue, which in turn is
able to reduce methemoglobin to hemoglobin. It is believed to be reduced in
the tissues to the leuco form, which is slowly excreted mainly in the urine,
together with some unchanged drug. In large doses, Methylene Blue can
produce methemoglobinemia.

Unfortunately, Hb is not immune to chemical attacks, as
revealed by the dramatic changes in the color of hemoglobin
(F5.11) in the presence of oxygen (ruby-red), carbon dioxide
(blue-red), carbon monoxide (cherry red), and cyanide (bright
red). The erythrocyte has limited ability to detoxify activated
oxygen which, if present in excess, becomes toxic to the cell.
Hemoglobin can be pathologically oxidized to
MetHemoglobin.

The iron in the Heme of Hb is transformed to the ferric state
(Fe+++, an “electron” is lost) rather than the useful ferrous
state (Fe++). MetHb is greenish brown to black in color and
does not bind oxygen or CO; it binds water instead. Normal
level in the blood are 1-2 %, it becomes dangerous at 15 %.
Hb in erythrocytes can be reduced back to the ferrous state by
two metabolic routes (F5.12):
 

a spontaneous system of detoxification based on reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) generated by
the glycolytic Embden-Meyerhof pathway. Cytochrome b5
and cytochrome b5 reductase are the enzymes responsible
for changing MetHb back to Hb by maintaining NADH
supply. 95 % of MetHb is processed this way, and
F5.12. Reactivation of methemoglobin (MetHb) to hemoglobin (Hb)
following chemical reduction.
Methylene blue can be used to reactivate Hb in emergencies.

5-13

 

 
a dormant system based on glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenase (G-6-PD), involving methemoglobin
reductase, otherwise known as the “glucosemonophosphate shunt” and generating the co-factor
reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH). This accounts for 5 % of the regeneration
activity.

chlorate salts (Na- O-O-O-Cl).

These chemicals can produce hypoxia in the exposed. See
also figure 5.13.

Both systems are dependent on glycolysis.
Detoxification of MetHb is also
stimulated by addition of methylene
blue (left), which is a classic
antidote for nitrite and cyanide
poisoning. Administered
intravenously at doses of 2 mg/kg,
methylene blue increases the rate of
MetHb conversion to Hb 6-fold.
The vast majority of work-related hemolytic anemias are
induced by exposure to benzene derivatives or aromatic ring
structures. These agents are potential oxidation-reduction
catalysts, acting as oxygen scavengers, water soluble enough to
be carried in an aqueous medium but lipid soluble enough to
penetrate the erythrocytic membrane, gaining access to a vast
storehouse of oxygen. In the ensuing reaction, both the
chemical and the oxygen become free radicals.

F5.13. Structures of chemicals causing hemolysis or
methemoglobinemia.

Hb can also be irreversibly denatured or oxidized by chemical
agents. In this case, Heinz bodies are observed that are
covalently bound to the inside of the Red Blood Cell
membrane (F5.14). These cells are not toxic by themselves, but
will usually hemolyze because of loss of flexibility, which can
lead to anemia.

MetHb generating chemicals (oxidizers):
 
 

nitrites (-NO2),
nitrates (-NO3, need to be activated to nitrites in the
gut), aromatic amines (NH2-Benzene),

F5.14. Heinz bodies in an erythrocyte.
x 26,000. Rifkind, 1965.

5-14

5.2.1.3. Exposure Examples

5.2.1.4. The Genetics of Erythrocytic Hemolysis

Chemical-induced hemolysis began in the 1800's German dye
industry when coal tars were converted into basic industrial
chemicals, including anilines, nitrobenzenes, quinones and
naphthalene.
Hemolytic anemias can be caused by such metals as lead,
mercury, copper, as well as arsenic (as arsine), all of these
cytolytic metals are highly reactive with sulphydryl groups
(-SH) that are abundant in erythrocytes in the form of
glutathione, hemoglobin, etc. Cases.

In most individuals, the mechanisms of detoxification
described previously are sufficient to deal with any MetHb and
oxygen radical formation. However, the most common enzyme
deficiency in humans is caused by a variety of mutations to
band Xq28 of the "X" chromosome. Severe reductions of the
enzyme glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD, shown),
impairs the "rapid" protective glucose
monophosphate shunt system,
leaving individuals unable to cope
with oxygen stress. These subjects
are particularly sensitive to red cell
hemolysis induced by chemicals,
because glutathione cannot be
regenerated. The deficiency is rare among Caucasians but,
among blacks, some 12-14 % of males, but only 2 % of
females have the deficiency.
Humans genetically deficient in G6PD can have 30 % MetHb
in their red blood cells. Treatment with reducing agents like
ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) or Methylene Blue considerably
lowers the amount of MetHb in their blood. The main clinical
manifestation of this deficiency is (induced) hemolysis. In most
cases this passes unnoticed, because the organism is able to
compensate. Most patients live a perfectly normal life without
appreciable effects of this disorder.
When it becomes noticeable, it is usually the result of an
oxidizing factor from the environment: a drug, an infection,
some food or chemical exposure.

1) Explosives workers, called "blue workers", due to chronic
cyanosis resulting from methemoglobin formation as a
consequence of exposure to nitro-benzenes and
nitrotoluenes.
2) Antimalarial drugs related to 8-amino-quinoline such as
pamaquine and primaquine, used in WW II in the Pacific
theatre, resulted in massive hemolytic crises among black
soldiers. It was recognized that there was a susceptible
subgroup within this population.
3) The analgesics acetanilide and acetophenetidin have been
removed from the over-the-counter market because of
patient hemotoxicity, particularly with abuse.
4) A defoaming agent in beer, an aniline-related chemical,
caused "blue workers" in a Montreal brewery exposed to
leaking defoamer3-7.
5) Repeated development of new drugs based on
phenylhydrazine.

5-15

Chemical-induced methemoglobinemia case history.
Levy and Wegman, Occupational Health, Little and Brown, 359362, Boston, 1983.

The key cellular oxidant scavenger in this pathway is the
tripeptide, reduced glutathione (GSH, gamma-L-glutamyl-Lcysteinyl-glycine), formed by the hexose-pentose
monophosphate shunt. Relatively high levels (3-5 mM) of the
reduced form are normally present in erythrocytes, with only
miniscule amounts of the oxidized (GSSG) dimer.

The patient was a well-built, vigorous, 50-year old man who had been employed for 21
years as a laborer in a dyestuff plant where he was in daily contact with aniline. Among
his regular duties was the refilling each morning of a barrel containing industrial grade
aniline. The barrel, in which aniline was stored under pressure, was located on the floor
of a room shared by three employees. Aniline from this sealed barrel was pumped as
needed via tubing into the dye-application work area by means of hydraulic pressure.
Beginning about two years prior to the accident, the man complained to his wife of
a gradually worsening, unremitting headache. For two months she in turn had noted
bluish discoloration of her husband's lips, ears, and fingertips, most evident on his
return home from work each evening. One midsummer morning, just after the patient
had filled the reservoir barrel with a fresh supply of aniline under sealed pressure, the
bottom of the barrel blew out. Roughly 30 gallons of aniline gushed forth, flowing over
the patient's clothing and inundating the floor of the work area. He, as well as the two
co-workers standing nearby, rapidly experienced nausea, dizziness, and faintness, but
after cleaning up the spilled chemical all resumed their work until noon. Two hours
later the patient returned to work but grew dizzy, nauseated, and began to vomit. (The
two co-workers had called in to report themselves too ill to return to the factory.) The
patient's physician was called, and immediate hospitalization was arranged.
On admission, the patient was described as confused, agitated, breathing rapidly
and deeply, and displaying dark cyanosis of the hands, feet, and ears. His mucous
membranes also appeared grey-blue, particularly when viewed under light from a
quartz-mercury lamp. Freshly drawn blood appeared dark maroon-brown. There was no
anemia, but the reticulocyte count was 5.8 percent and, after supravital staining, 6.8
percent of his red cells displayed Heinz bodies. About 60 percent of the patient's
hemoglobin was in the form of methemoglobin (ferrihemoglobin). Within less than 24
hours the hematocrit dropped moderately, the reticulocyte level rose (and continued to
rise for several days), and the portion of red cells containing Heinz bodies increased to
nearly 30 percent. The methemoglobin concentration fell abruptly during the initial 15
hours and by the second day only traces remained. However, 15 percent of the
hemoglobin at that time was in the denatured form of sulfhemoglobin. By day 4, despite
several transfusions, the anemia had become more severe, the reticulocyte count was 11
percent and the level of Heinz-body-containing cells was 28.8 percent. Nevertheless,
the patient felt much improved and complained no longer of dizziness or nausea. Urine
specimens on admission and during the several days thereafter contained high
concentrations of the oxidant hydroxyl derivative of aniline, p-aminophenol.
In the ensuing week the patient gradually recovered completely from his symptoms,
and the only laboratory aberrations that persisted beyond ten days were elevated levels
of reticulocytes and of cells containing Heinz bodies; traces of sulfhemoglobin were
detectable for several weeks. All three abnormalities cleared entirely within two months
of the accident.

Glutathione is a radical scavenger that works rapidly (with or
without the enzyme glutathione-s-transferase, a Phase II
conjugating enzyme) to neutralize highly reactive intermediates
capable of damaging and weakening the erythrocytic
membrane. The inability to maintain adequate levels of GSH
destabilizes the cellular protective mechanism, resulting in
weakened and easily ruptured erythrocytic membrane and
enhancing hemolysis.
The syndrome leads, upon exposure, to methemoglobinuria,
formation of sulfhemoglobin (only partially soluble in
erythrocytes) which precipitates into spheroidal bodies (Heinz
or inclusion bodies), alteration of the shape, rigidity, and
viability of the red cell, causing hemolysis and resulting in
massive hematuria.
It is important to point out that Heinz body hemolytic anemia
can occur in normal (not enzyme-deficient) individuals, but
only if exposure to a chemical oxidant is several fold higher
than that producing hemolysis in the G-6-PD deficient person.
5.2.2. Metabolic Anoxia: Cyanide and H2S
Hydrogen cyanide is a colorless gas or liquid. About 30 % of
people are unable to detect cyanide gas’s (HCN) bitter almond
odor, but those who can often smell cyanide at autopsy of a
poisoning victim. The lethal dose of sodium cyanide by mouth
is 100 mg, and 2000 mg/minute x m3 when inhaled. Effects are
confusion, dizziness, increased breathing and heart rate,
5-16

convulsions and asphyxia. In HCN poisoning, blood delivery
of oxygen is normal, but HCN impedes the use of oxygen by
cells.
F5.15. Synthesis of ATP
within mitochondria.
Donald Nicholson, 2002.

Exposed subjects have
a red color, similar to
CO poisoning, since
their venous blood
returns still loaded with
unused oxygen.
Ultimately, the brain
cells controlling
respiration die.
Cyanide specifically
inhibits (see F5.15)
cytochrome oxidase
a3, the cytochrome that
normally releases ATP.
The therapy for
cyanide poisoning is
illustrated in F5.16.
Oddly enough, the therapy involves the formation of a toxic
product, MetHb. This is done by administration of inhaled
amyl nitrite and by injections of sodium nitrite. The production
of MetHb allows drawing CN away from cytochromes because
ferric heme groups avidly bind ionic cyanide, forming
cyanmethemoglobin. This is followed by the administration of
thiosulfate. Thiosulfate (-S2O3--) provides a substrate for the
enzyme rhodanese which transforms cyanide bound to Hb to
thiocyanate. The thiocyanate, much less toxic, is excreted.

F5.16. Therapeutic management of cyanide poisoning.
Casarett & Doull, 1995.

Zyklon B (shown), used in concentration
camps and as an insecticide, is a
crystallized form of hydrogen cyanide.
Most resuscitations from cyanide poisoning
occur in individuals who ingested soluble
salts, where absorption is delayed.
H2S, the gas with a rotten egg odor, is another chemical which
impairs the use of oxygen by body cells (cytotoxic hypoxia).
80 ppm of hydrogen sulfide can reversibly bring the
metabolism of mice to a standstill, lowering their body
temperature from 37° to 11° C. The animals reduced their use
of oxygen by a factor of 10, lowering their heart and breathing
rates20. This characteristic might be used to attenuate ischemic
damage during emergency situations.
5-17

5.2.3.3. Chemicals causing Thrombocytopenia

C. elegans, when grown in 50 ppm H2S, the OSHA human
exposure limit, lives 70 % longer than worms living in normal
air19.
H2S is naturally produced in the body, and manages many
important biological functions, in particular blood pressure21
Few poisons are more rapidly acting than inhaled hydrogen
sulfide, which is common to sewers and oil fields.
The treatment is similar to that of CN poisoning, but there are
rarely trained individuals available, and prepared with an
intravenous nitrite injection.

Acetaminophen (Tylenol), Aminopyrine, Aspirin and
salicylates, Benzene, Bismuth, Chloramphenicol, Chlordane,
Corticosteroids, Dextropropoxyphene (Darvon), Diazepam
(Valium), Diethylstilbestrol, Digitoxin, Dimercaprol,
Disulfiram (pesticide), Insulin, Isoniazid, Lindane   (pesticide),
Mercurials, Phenobarbital, Phenylbutazone, Potassium Iodide,
Quinidine, Quinine, Stilbestrol, Tetracycline, Toluene
diisiocyanate (manufacture of elastomers), Trinitrotoluene
(TNT).

5.2.3. Alterations in Cellular Composition

5.2.3.4. Chemicals causing Hemolysis

Many chemicals can attack the blood, resulting in obvious
changes in blood cellular composition. In most cases, the exact
mechanism of toxicity is unknown. Toxicity to stem cells,
which largely control the ultimate composition of the
downstream differentiated cells, needs to be defined in a
special way, different from toxicity to differentiated (somatic)
cells, particularly in their relation to oxygen.
Differential blood counts can document imbalances of blood
composition resulting from exposure to toxicants.

Arsine, Benzene, Butyl Cello solve (dry cleaning),
Carbutamide, Chloramphenicol, Chlorpromazine, Dimercaprol,
Lead, Mephenytoin, Methyl chloride, Naphthalene,
Nitrobenzene, Phenylbutazone, Phenylhydrazine (dye
synthesis), Primaquine, Quinacrine, Streptomycin,
Tolbutamide, Trinitrotoluene.
5.2.3.5. Chemicals causing Anemia-Pancytopenia

Alkylating agents, Amitriplyline, Ampicillin, Arsenicals,
Arsphenamine, Aspirin, Benzene, Carbon Tetrachloride,
Chloramphenicol, Chlordane, Chloroquine, Colchicine,
Diazepam, Gold compounds, Hydrochloroquine, Insecticides,
Isoniazid, Lindane, Meprobamate, Methimazole,
Oxyphenbutazone, Phenylbutazone, Potassium Perchlorate
(explosive), Propylthiouracil, Quinacrine, Quinidine,
Salycilates, Streptomycin, Sulfa drugs, Tetracycline,
Trinitrotoluene.

5.2.3.1. White Blood Cell Imbalances

Exposure to some chemicals (benzene) can induce leukemia.
Chemicals that reduce white blood cell counts (leukopenia)
lower resistance to infection (DDT decreases monocytes and
lymphocytes).
5.2.3.2. Thrombocytopenia

Low platelet counts produced by certain chemicals may result
in blood loss. There are other mechanism for blood loss. For
example, warfarin inhibits fibrin formation from fibrinogen,
while aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation.

 

5-18

Canada has banned lindane.

mechanism on the enzyme aminolevulinic acid synthetase
(ALA-S) based on the body's need for heme. With sufficient
heme being manufactured, ALA-S does not function, whereas
with the blocked ferrochelatase, there is no heme formed and
ALA-S continues to make aminolevulinic acid, which is used
by other enzymes to make porphyrin intermediates. Levels of
these intermediates build up in the body, urinary excretion of
ALA is elevated (one diagnostic test) as is excretion of a
number of the protoporphyrins (both fecal and urinary
excretion are diagnostic).

F5.17. Synthesis of Hb and
mechanism of action of Pb,
directly (*) and indirectly
by feedback.

The symptoms and signs of intoxication are shown in F5.18.
One specific sign of plumbism is the lead “line”, a deposit of
blue-black lead sulfide deposited into the gums immediately
above the teeth (F5.19).

5.2.3.6. Example: Lead Poisoning

Lead intoxication is a on-going problem in numerous industries
(smelters, brass foundries, painters, miners, garage workers,
paint removal by blowtorch or power sander). Hypertension,
reproductive problems, decreased kidney and brain function are
common. Hematologic symptoms are generally chronic in
nature, and marked by the insidious development of:
(1) chronic hemolysis,
(2) microcytic, hypochromic anemia, and
(3) sideroblastic (iron-related) changes in bone marrow.

F5.18. Symptoms (left) and signs (right) in lead poisoning. Dagg et al.

Typical hematologic changes of lead poisoning in adults
(F5.20) include:

Lead translocates to the long bones where erythropoiesis
occurs, interfering with the synthesis of the heme (porphyrin)
precursor to hemoglobin (F5.17), by inhibiting the key enzyme
ferrochetalase, the last step in heme synthesis. In this scheme,
the initial step in the heme pathway is controlled by a feedback

1) hypochromic, microcytic erythrocytes,
2) basophilic stippling in erythrocytes: "granules" of semiprecipitated protein,
3) presence of siderotic granules (containing iron),

5-19

4) reticulocytosis - reticulocytes being released into blood,
5) increased osmotic fragility of erythrocytes, erythroid
hyperplasia in bone marrow which causes #1 above.
F5.19. Lead lines. Belknap,

Wintrobe, 1974.

F5.20. Hematologic changes in
the anemia of lead poisoning in
adults.

F5.22. Hematotoxicity among Chinese Workers
heavily exposed to Benzene.

Wintrobe, 1974.

T5.21. Effects of Exposure to Benzene
Concentration in PPM
Effects
10,000
Death after a few hours
4,000
Narcosis
Risk of very severe pancytopenias
200-400
Abnormal blood values in 50-80 % of
cases
Considerable risk of leukemia
125-200
Severe pancytopenias
Milder forms of pancytopenias &
other cytopenias
65-125
Acute, headache & fatigue after a
few hours
40-65
Hemocytopenia
Blood cells affected
25-40
Reduced blood Hemoglobin
10-20
Critical level for leukemia risk
1-10
Chromosome Damage
Odor Threshold & OSHA Exposure
1
limit

If you have been
intoxicated with lead, what
can you do? EDTA can be
used to chelate lead out of
the body. For milder forms
of intoxication, it appears
that supplements of 1.2 g
per day calcium can reduce blood levels of lead by 31 %23.
5.2.3.7. Example: Benzene Poisoning

A study of hematotoxicity among Chinese workers heavily
exposed to benzene (Rothman at al.) produced the results of
F5.22: a decrease in white blood cells, absolute lymphocyte
count and platelets.
Although drugs (chloramphenicol, sulphonamides,
acetazolamide, phenylbutazone, mephenytoin,
hexachlorocyclohexane) and anti-cancer agents (methotrexate,
alkylating agents such as BCNU) can induce aplastic anemia
(failure of bone marrow stem cells to produce an adequate
number of erythrocytes, granulocytes, and platelets), benzene
accounts for 5 to 10 cases of fatal aplastic anemia per year.
5-20

Before 1950, benzene was responsible for approximately 60 %
of secondary (toxic) aplastic anemias, of which 2 to 4 %
progressed to acute non-lymphatic leukemia. Benzene is
considered to be a human carcinogen, responsible for acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML).
In Turkey, where benzene was a common constituent of glues
for leather shoes, the incidence of AML climbed to a peak of 7
cases in a study population in 1973. Of some 44 patients with
aplastic anemia, 6 died of AML. With introduction of
restrictive measures on the use of benzene, the incidence of
AML declined within three years to zero (F5.23).
Annual Number of Leukemic S hoeworkers

Year

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

1972

1971

1970

1969

1967

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1968.

Cases

in Istanbul

5.3. ImmunoToxicity
5.3.1. Overview of the Immune system
The primary function of the immune system in mammals and
lower species is protection from microbial pathogens (bacteria,
virus, fungi and yeasts) and tumors.
Lymphocytes play an essential role in immune responses.
They are divided into B and T lymphocytes, based on the
presence of surface (CD) markers.
T lymphocytes constitute 55-75 % of circulating lymphocytes,
and express specific surface markers (CD2 and CD3).
B lymphocytes first develop in the fetal liver, and later in the
bone marrow. They constitute 10-20 % of peripheral blood
lymphocytes, and express specific surface antigens (CD 21 and
CD22).
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) have the ability to present
antigens to lymphocytes in a way that they can be recognized.
B lymphocytes recognize self antigens, whereas T lymphocytes
recognize antigenic peptides associated with major
histocompatibility complex molecules, which includes both
self and nonself antigens. The main types of APCs are
Langerhans cells, dendritic cells and macrophages.

F5.23. Leukemia and benzene
exposure.

Occupational levels have
been high in the past, but
government regulations
have forced their
reduction to a TWA of 1
ppm.

In a study, Infante and White demonstrated that less than one
week of exposure at 10 ppm resulted in chromosomal damage
to bone marrow cells, significant depression of bone marrow
and disturbances of immune function4. It was felt that these
observations were highly significant, given the fact that most
leukemias and related disorders seem to involve stem cell
abnormalities and immuno-deficiencies.

5.3.2. ImmunoToxicology
Immunotoxicology is concerned with the detrimental effects of
foreign substances (xenobiotics) on host immunity, either as a
consequence of the activity of a substance or its metabolites on
the immune system or as an inappropriate immunological
response to that substance. It includes immune responses to
xenobiotics that result in allergy and other forms of immune
injury.

5-21

5.3.3. Immune Bioactivation of Xenobiotics
Xenobiotics can modulate the function of the immune system
at several levels and can have two opposite consequences:
immunosuppression or immune overstimulation.
Immunosuppression can result in a diminished resistance
against infection, while immunostimulation can result in
hypersensitivity reactions, allergies, and autoimmune disease.
5.3.3.1. Immuno-Suppression

A number of xenobiotics can suppress the maturation and
development of immune cells and cause immunosuppression.
For example, benzene is myelotoxic, because its reactive
metabolites can severely damage progenitor cells in the bone
marrow, leading to a pancytopenia. This general hematopoietic
cell destruction also includes the lymphocyte precursor cells (T
and B cells), so most specific immune system cells will be
compromised.
Immuno suppression can also be caused by other mechanisms
occurring in other parts of the immune system. A widely cited
example is the dioxins. The cause of dioxin-induced T cell
depletion is found in the thymus, the major site where T cells
differentiate. Indeed, after small doses of TCDD, animals
exhibit a decrease in thymus mass, leading to thymic atrophy.

F5.24. Immune System.

5-22

5.3.3.2. Immuno-Stimulation

inhalation or contact. Clinical ecologists believe MCS is a
form of immune dysfunction caused by the insidious
accumulation of exogenous chemical exposures over a lifetime.
Another biologically oriented hypothesis is that MCS
represents an atypical biological consequence of chemical
injury, or injury to the respiratory tract after an acute
inhalational episode. A more recent concept has focused on the
relationship between the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract
and the limbic (nervous) system.
Autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, disproportionately strike
women.

In contrast to xenobiotics such as TCDD, which suppress the
function of the immune system, other xenobiotics can enhance
the function of the immune system. Such an immunostimulatory effect can get out of control, and result in harmful
reactions. These forms of reactions are rare, but they are
toxicologically relevant because the degree of the adverse
effects can be severe.
5.3.3.2.1. Hyersensitivity Reactions and Allergies

Two basic forms of such xenobiotic-induced
immunostimulation are toxicologically relevant in humans. The
first type comprises allergic reactions, which are most
commonly known as chemically induced respiratory tract
allergies or contact allergies in the skin.
In allergic reactions, the immune response is directed against
toxicant-modified antigens, involving antibodies and T cells
directed against toxicant and antigen.

5.4. CardioToxicity
Toxicity of chemicals on the heart must include effects not
only on the musculature of the heart (F5.25) but on the nervous
tissue that controls the ventricular muscle (Purkinje system),
the vasculature of the heart, and the peripheral blood vessels
throughout the body.
5.4.1. Cardiac Physiology

F5.24a. A worker with protective
breathing gear unloads a truckload of
barley. The 1000 $ helmet is battery
powered with filters.

The actions of agents on the heart are usually designated as:
1) chronotropic effects - relating to "time", a slowing or
speeding up of the heart rate,
2) inotropic effects - relating to the force of contraction,
3) dromotropic effects - relating to nerve fibers and signal
conduction.

5.3.3.2.2. Autoimmune Reactions

Multiple chemical sensitivity
(MCS) is an adverse reaction to
low levels of many common
chemicals. Symptoms may occur
after toxicant exposure, by

5-23

and exposures in the workplace may either antagonize the
effects or potentiate them, further confounding the issues.

F5.25. Basic cardiac
morphology.

5.4.2. Chemicals causing Cardiac Toxicity

Guyton, 2001.

Many of the arrythmogenics listed below are also anesthetics.
Disturbances of the heart rhythm can be life-threatening, but
note that occasional heart beat irregularities are also common
in health, as shown by Holter monitors: chaotic behavior may
be a hallmark of life, with rigidly periodic rhythm being
pathognomonic…

The major
problems
encountered in the
heart itself usually
involve
interference either
(1) with the
normal electrical
activity of the
heart musculature
(atria, ventricles),
thereby altering
regular beating, or

Carbon tetrachloride, Chloroform Methyl bromide,
Chloropentafluoroethane, Methyl chloride, 1,2Dibromotetrafluoromethane, Methylene chloride,
Dichlorodifluoromethane,
Monochlorodifluoroethane,
cis-Dichloroethylene, Monochlorodifluoromethane,
trans-Dichloroethylene, Octafluorocyclobutane,
1,2-Dichloropropane, Propyl chloride,
Dichlorotetrafluroethane, 1,1,1- Trichloroethane,
Difluoroethane, Trichloroethane, Ethyl bromide,
Trichloroethylene, Ethyl chloride,
Trichlorofluoromethane,
Fluorocarbon 502, Trichloromonofluoroethylene,
1,2- Hexafluoroethane, Trichlorotrifluoroethane,
Isopropyl chloride, Trifluorobromethane.

(2) with the blood supply to the heart, resulting in ischemia
(lack of oxygenation), with subsequent damage to the cells,
and an interruption of normal electrical flow. Such damage
is usually monitored by the electrocardiogram (ECG),
specifically the PQRS complex and the T-wave
repolarization, with measurements being taken as "point-topoint" and "time-to-points distances" in the ECG to identify
the abnormalities (both timing and activity).

T5.26. Arrhythmogenic Halogenated Hydrocarbons.

Many chemical agents found in industrial settings exert a direct
effect on the peripheral blood vessels (constriction or
vasodilatation), with subsequent changes in blood pressure
causing hypertension or hypotension (severe headaches,
dizziness or fainting). Many workers may be on medication
5-24

of CO, for example, peripheral vascular effects occur prior to
any serious action on the heart 2.
Industrial scenes are related to incomplete combustion of fuels:
furnaces, boilers, automobiles, with hazards increased in cold
weather, because of closed doors and windows.

5.4.2.1. Gases

High concentrations of some gases (Table 5.27) affect
hemoglobin in erythrocytes, reducing their oxygen-carrying
capacity. Hypoxia ultimately affects the heart. Hypoxia
(reduction of oxygen in body tissues below physiological
levels) may cause angina (cardiac pain without tissue
destruction), arrhythmias, and myocardial infarction (pain with
destruction of cardiac tissue). With increasing concentrations

5.4.2.2. Alcohols/Aldehydes

Ethanol (and its metabolite acetaldehyde), dihydroxyalcohols
(propylene glycol, polyethylene glycols) and other relatively
volatile chemicals cause a negative inotropic effect (decrease
in force of contraction). Ethanol is effective at 75 mg per 100
ml, just below the "legal limit". Arrhythmias may result from
chronic exposure to ethanol, sometimes resulting in ventricular
fibrillation and sudden death.

T5.27. Cardiovascular toxicants.
GASES
CO2, CO, CS2, CN, H2S, NOx, SO2, etc.
produce anoxia, hypoxia, with effects on hemoglobin and
tissues hemoproteins.
ALCOHOLS/ALDEHYDES
ethanol-acetaldehyde, aldehydes in general, dihydroalcohols
are cardio-depressants causing negative inotropic effects,
cardiomegaly.
METALS
Cd, Pb, Co, Mn, Ba
produce negative inotropic and dromotropic effects as well as
structural damage to the heart.
HALOGENATED ALKANES/ALKENES
degreasing solvents, freons, anesthetics (halothane,
chloroform), dry cleaning fluids
elicit negative chronotropic and inotropic effects, resulting in
dysrythmias, sensitization of cardiac muscle to
catecholamines.
ORGANIC NITRITES/NITRATES
cardiac drugs (amyl nitrite, glyceryl trinitrate), room
deodorizers (butyl and isobutyl nitrite), explosives
(nitroglycerine, trinitrotoluene)
have as a dominant effect vasodilatation of peripheral blood
vessels, pooling blood in extremities, production of
methemoglobin.

Chronic exposure to industrial alcohols may induce
(1) cardiomegaly (heart enlargement, dilation of chambers),
(2) interstitial fibrosis, and
(3) increased lipids in myocardial cells.
Aldehydes at higher concentrations may stimulate the release
of catecholamines, with a sympathomimetic acceleration of the
heart rate (positive chronotropic effect).
It is believed that the cardiodepressant (acute) effects of
alcohols and aldehydes are due to an inhibition of intra-cellular
calcium transport. Calcium is essential for sodium-potassium
transport, inter-cellular communication in the transmission of
electrical impulses, and the release of neurotransmitters.
However, aldehydes might stop the formation of advanced
glycation end products, which would explain the positive effect
on cardiovascular health related to wine consumption16.
Various phenols (phenol and dinitrophenols) are excellent
inhibitors of sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatases
5-25

(ATPases). The enzymes pump sodium out of depolarized cells
(nerve cells as well as cardiac muscle cells) in order to achieve
repolarization. Such agents have a negative chronotropic effect
and a negative dromotropic effect, the heart beating more
slowly.

Barium is a potent arrhythmogenic agent, as little as 5 mg/kg
(intravenous) causing ventricular tachycardia (it is used as a
model for screening antiarrythmic drugs).
5.4.2.4. Halogenated Alkanes/Alkenes

Degreasing solvents, freons, trichloroethylene,
perchloroethylene and anesthetics (chloroform, halothane,
methoxyflurane) exert similar negative chronotropic, inotropic,
and dromotropic effects on the heart. Medically, chloroform
was the first agent demonstrated to sensitize the cardiac muscle
to catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine) during
surgical procedures. Halothane possesses the same property, as
do most other halogenated (fluorinated and chlorinated)
solvents. The negative inotropism increases with up to 4
chlorines and chlorinated alkenes (trichloroethylene) are more
potent than trichloroethanol.
Dysrhythmias result and, if the ECG is done at an appropriate
time, one can see skipped beats, irregularly spaced beats, extra
beats, all out of phase with the regular electrical activity. The
irregularities may be spasmodic (periodic), necessitating the
monitoring of patients for a length of time before the effects
are seen. Frequently, the arrhythmias will be related to
excessive excitation, which produces an epinephrine "storm",
triggering the responses.
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are used as electrical
insulators, as lubricants, as additives to make plastics more
pliable, in adhesives, even as a component of some inks. Being
lipophilic, these pollutants settle into fats and oil. David
Carpenter of the University of Albany and his colleagues
discovered a dose-dependent climb in risk of both systolic and
diastolic hypertension with rising blood concentrations of
PCBs. Those with less than 1.24 parts per billion were

5.4.2.3. Heavy Metals

Lead, cadmium and cobalt have selective cardiotoxic
properties, producing negative inotropic and dromotropic
effects, as well as structural (degenerative) changes in cardiac
muscle. The cardiomyopathy seen in drinkers of illicit
"moonshine" during prohibition was attributed to lead. The
metal originated in the homemade condensing coils soldered
with lead, or use of old automobile radiators.
A study in women 65 and older indicates that higher blood lead
increases the risk of premature death. Women with less than 8
µg/dl of blood are used as a control, while those with higher
lead had a 60 percent increased risk of dying, after accounting
for factors such as age, smoking and drinking24.
A bizarre cardiomyopathy affecting habitual beer drinkers in
Quebec City was related to the presence of a chemical additive
containing cobalt sulphate. The mortality, related to congestive
heart failure, was 46.1 %3-7. A divalent cation, cobalt can
substitute for calcium but, perhaps more importantly, it can
interfere with hemoprotein (hemoglobin, cytochromes)
synthesis, resulting in hypoxic conditions both in the blood and
tissues, with impairment of Phase I bio-transforming enzymes
(mono-oxygenases).
Other heavy metals (manganese, nickel) can block calcium
channels in heart muscle.



5-26

Cathecolamines accelerate the heart rate.

designated the reference group. The middle third hosted
contaminant levels between 1.25 and 3.64 ppb. Group three:
everyone higher than that. The chance of having unhealthy
systolic blood pressure — that maximum pressure, which
occurs as the heart muscle contracts — was tripled in the
middle PCB-contamination group and almost quadrupled in the
highest PCB group.26

bradycardia-hypertension. Tolerance develops with repeated
use, methemoglobinemia becoming a complication.
Fatalities have occurred in workers exposed to organic nitrates
after strenuous exercise, 1 to 2 days following cessation of
exposure. There is a loss of vascular tone with pooling and
trapping of blood in the veins of the lower extremities.
Hypertrophy of the left ventricle occurs in workers handling
nitro-glycerine (glyceryl trinitrate). Considerable amounts of
methemoglobin are formed with chronic exposure.

5.4.2.5. Organic Nitrates

The treatment of anginal pain with amyl nitrite is well known.
Crushing a "pearl" of this highly volatile liquid in a cloth and
inhaling it produces a rather dramatic relief of pain. Similar
effects can be achieved with glyceryl trinitrate tablets placed
sublingually and causing a longer action (10 to 30 minutes). By
both routes, the heart and coronary vessels receive a relatively
high dose of agent which causes localized vasodilatation of the
coronary vessels and an improvement of local circulation with
a relief of the ischemia. Longer-acting (6-8 hr) organic nitrates
(erythrityl tetranitrate, pentaerythrityl tetranitrate) are also
used. There are a number of nitrated compounds, particularly
in the explosives industry, that cause the same effects.

F5.28. Toxic effects of nitrite inhalation.

Rapid flushing (face)
Pulsation in head, headache
Cyanosis, shallow respiration, respiratory failure
Confusion, weakness, vertigo, fainting, hypotension
Motor unrest
Thready pulse
Clammy skin

Trinitrotoluene (TNT) is an excellent example of toxicity in the
explosives industry. In a Japanese munitions plant, workers
complained of dizziness, severe headaches, lethargy, and
general malaise. The measurement of blood pressure showed
marked decreases in systolic/diastolic ratios before and after
work, from lowered systolic pressure. When handling the gellike mixture, the workers wore surgical rubber gloves, but
never changed the gloves, using them day after day, and not
discarding them. With a fresh pair of surgical gloves at the
beginning of the shift, no change in blood pressure was seen
later in the day. Even more impressive was the fact that
regularly replaced cotton (washable) gloves protected the
workers. The concentration of nitrated compounds were
building up over time in the gloves. The compound was being

With restrictions on prescription amyl nitrite, butyl and
isobutyl nitrite have been used as room deodorizers in spray
applicators, but also as drugs of abuse for enhancing sexual
pleasure. The inhalation route produces a "rush". Butyl nitrite
has a greater hypotensive effect than lower analogues but not
as great as the isobutyl derivative. The toxic effects of nitrite
inhalation are shown in Table 5.28, most of them from the
peripheral vasodilatation. In addition, nitrites will diminish
cardiac contraction without affecting heart rate (decreased
efficiency). Other studies noted bradycardia (vagal nerve
stimulation) and heart block at higher doses. Exposure has also
been associated with tachycardia-hypotension, sometimes
5-27

absorbed by the hot and sweating skin, leading to
vasodilatation.
There are a large number of different nitrated compounds used
in present-day military and civilian explosives. Miners, reentering an area in which blasting has taken place, frequently
experience severe headaches unless they wait for the
ventilation system to clear the area of volatiles. Military
personnel found that a "high" could be achieved by putting a
small piece of explosive "putty" under the tongue or in the
cheek. Nitrate workers can die suddenly after exposure ceases
(on weekends and holidays), and may exhibit “Monday
morning angina”. Re-exposure may trigger rebound
vasospasms and fibrillation.
5.5. Vascular

Toxicity

F5.29. Cross section of an artery
and a vein. Notice the
musculature around the artery.

Since arteries must withhold
more blood pressure, and
control delivery of blood to
tissues, they have a more
substantial wall than veins (F5.29). The Smooth Muscle Cells
in the arterial wall can be injured after the endothelium has
been damaged by a toxicant. In response, they may proliferate,
creating a bulge which may be invaded by macrophages. A
toxicant may also penetrate through the endothelium to create a
mutation in the smooth muscle cells, followed by proliferation.
Both mechanisms trigger chronic inflammation and narrowing
of the artery. The physiological mechanisms leading to a
vascular accident are shown in F5.30.
F5.30. Mechanisms of endothelial injury.
National Geographic, Feb.2007.

5-28

5.5.2.2. Heavy Metals

Exposure to environmental chemicals can also disable vascular
control. Phenanthraquinone, on oily component of diesel soot,
inhibits vessel dilatation in older rat muscle, but not in younger
ones22.

Arsenic, Beryllium, Cadmium, Chromium (deficiency), Copper
(Chronic and Acute), Copper (deficiency), Germanium,
Indium, Lead, Mercury, Selenium, Thallium

5.5.1. Atherosclerosis

5.5.2.3. Dust Particles

Some degree of arterial
obstructions are found even
in young men. Since
coronary arteries are not that
large (F5.31), it is not
surprising that by-pass
operations are becoming
common.

Animal and human studies show that dust particles less than
2.5 µm in air pollution irritate the lungs and provoke
inflammation of the blood vessels. Over time, this leads to
thickening of the artery walls17. Long-term exposure to air
pollution enhances one’s chances of dying from heart attack or
stroke. The more pollution there is around your home, the
thicker the walls of your carotid artery becomes13. Such
particles, irrespective of their chemical makeup, are able to
suppress secretion of endogenous vasodilators, such as nitric
oxide.
Breathing 0.15 µg/m3 of exhaust particles, typical of heavily
polluted cities, is capable of immediately rising diastolic blood
pressure by 6 mm of Hg. Once the exposure ends, the effect
does not last more than a few minutes18.

F5.31. Narrowing of a coronary
artery (white arrow).
National Geographic, Feb.2007

It appears that mitochondrial
damage foreshadows the
onset of atherosclerosis.
Narrowing of arteries due to atherosclerosis can be seen in a
beating heart using a 10-second advanced imaging technique
(Computed Tomography).

5.5.2.4. Others
Allylamine, p-Aminopropionitrile, Boron, Butadiene,
Carbamylhydrazine, Carbon disulfide, Chlorophenoxy
Herbicides, Dimethylnitrosamine, Dinitrotoluenes, 4-Fluoro-l0methyl-12-benzyanthracene, Glycerol, Hydrogen fluoride,
Hydrazinobenzoic acid, Paraquat, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, Organophosphate
Pesticides, T-2 toxin.

5.5.2. Agents Toxic to Blood Vessels
There are four large classes of agents capable of intoxicating
blood vessels: gases, heavy metals, dust particles and others.

Coronary Artery Disease can occur from exposure to volatile carbon
disulfide (CS2) through interaction with a number of enzymes.

5.5.2.1. Gases

Auto exhaust, Carbon monoxide, Nitric oxide, Oxygen, Ozone

5-29

A Case of Cardiac Failure

12. Correction of sickle-cell disease in transgenic mouse models by gene therapy. Science 294:2368-71. Dec 14th, 2001.
13. Ambient Air Pollution and Atherosclerosis in Los Angeles. Künzli N et al. Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume
113, Number 2, February 2005.
14. Delayed neuropathology after carbon monoxide poisoning is immune-mediated. Stephen R. Thom et al.
PNAS, vol. 101, no. 37, 13660-13665, September 14 2004.
15. Maintained cardiac pumping in anoxic crucian carp. Stecyk, JAW et al. Science 306 (Oct. 1) : 77. 2004.
16. Does antagonism of advanced glycation by acetaldehyde resolve the "French paradox"? Al-Abed, Y., and R. Bucala.
Meeting of the American Chemical Society. August. New Orleans. 1999.
17. Long-term Air Pollution Exposure and Acceleration of Atherosclerosis and Vascular Inflammation in an Animal
Model. Qinghua Sun et al. JAMA. 2005;294:3003-3010.
18. Acute Blood Pressure Responses in Healthy Adults During Controlled Air Pollution Exposures. Bruce Urch,
Environmental Health Perspectives Volume 113, Number 8, August 2005.
19. Hydrogen sulfide increases thermotolerance and lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. Miller DL, Roth MB.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 104 (51), 20618-22, Dec 2007.
20. Hydrogen Sulfide Induces a Suspended Animation-State in Mice. Blackstone, E.A., Morrison, M.L., Roth, M. B.,
Science, 308(5721), 518, April 2005.
21. The vasorelaxant effect of H2S as a novel endogenous gaseous KATP channel opener. Weimin Zhao, Jing Zhang,
Yanjie Lu and Rui Wang. The EMBO Journal 20, 6008–6016, 2001.
22. Effects of Age, Gender, and Estrogen on Endothelium-Dependent Vasodilation Subsequent to Phenanthraquinone
Exposure. Prisby RD et al. 120th Annual Meeting of The American Physiological Society. May 1st, 2007.
23. Effect of Calcium Supplementation on Blood Lead Levels in Pregnancy: A Randomized Control Trial. Ettinger AS,
Lamadrid-Figueroa H, Téllez-Rojo MM, Mercado-García A, Peterson KE, Schwartz J, Hu H, Hernández-Avila M.

A 51-year old cement finisher spends 2 months spraying and mopping
urethane coating in a parking.
He develops rash on his legs and quits because of health concerns. 2
days later, without a known history of heart disease, he is found dead
by his wife.
Coroner: cardio-pulmonary arrest, probable acute myocardial
infarction.
Two other workers testify of health problems which led them to quit
the same job.
MSDS: two part mixture containing polyols, solvents, un-reacted
methylene bis-4 cyclohexyl-isocyanate, xylene, 2-ethoxyethyl acetate,
un-reacted Toluene Di-Isocyanate.
Measurements show as much as 1 mg/m3 of TDI (7 times the allowed
limit). Once sensitized to TDI, individuals can react to concentrations
below the odor threshold.

http://dx.doi.org/

Environmental Health Perspectives. doi:10.1289/ehp.11868 (available at
) Online 2
September 2008
24.Association of blood lead concentrations with mortality in older women: a prospective cohort study. Naila Khalil,
John W Wilson, Evelyn O Talbott, Lisa A Morrow, Marc C Hochberg, Teresa A Hillier, Susan B Muldoon, Steven R
Cummings, Jane A Cauley. Environmental Health 2009, 8:15 (3 April 2009)
25. Sickle hemoglobin confers tolerance to Plasmodium infection. A. Ferreira et al. Cell, Vol. 145, April 29, 2011, p. 398.
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.049
26. Blood pressure and hypertension in relation to levels of serum polychlorinated biphenyls in residents of Anniston,
Alabama. Goncharov A et al. Journal of Hypertension: October 2010 - Volume 28 - Issue 10 - p 2053–2060
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833c5f3e

Bronchospasm occurring from exposure to toluene diisocyanate can
become permanent, resulting in poor lung ventilation. The ensuing
hypoxia causes vaso-constriction*, pulmonary artery hypertension and
finally right heart failure.
*Vascular reaction in the lung is contrary to reaction in other parts of
the body. If vessels are isolated from the lung, they no longer show this
reaction (an unknown substance is released by lung tissue).

REFERENCES
1. Hormones that stimulate the growth of blood cells. Golde, D.W. and Gasson, J.C. Sci. Amer., pp. 62-70, July 1988.
2. Hematologic disorders. Jandl, J.H. In Occupational Health. Recognizing and Preventing Work-Related Disease, First
Edition, Levy, B.S. and Wegman, D.H. (Editors), Little, Brown and Company, Boston, Ch. 24, pp. 357-371, 1983.
3. Malignancies due to occupational exposure to benzene. Aksoy, M. Amer. J. Indust. Med. 7, 395-402, 1985.
4. Projections of leukemia risk associated with occupational exposure to benzene. Infante, P.F. and White, M.C. Amer. J.
Indust. Med. 7, 403-413, 1985.
5. Cardiovascular disorders. Rosenmann, K.D. In Occupational Health, First Edition, Levy, B.S. and Wegman, D.H.
(Editors).Little, Brown and Company, Boston, Ch. 22, pp. 331-340, 1983.
6. Cardiovascular disorders. Theriault, G.P. In Occupational Health, Second Edition, Levy, B.S. and Wegman, D.H.
(Editors). Little, Brown and Company, Boston, Ch. 27, pp. 431-440, 1983.
7. Quebec beer-drinkers' cardiomyopathy: forty-eight cases. Morin, Y.L. et al. C.M.A.J. 97, 881-883, 1967.
8. Quebec beer-drinkers' cardiomyopathy: clinical signs and symptoms. Mercier, G. and Patry, G. C.M.A.J. 97, 884-889,
1967.
9. Quebec beer-drinkers' cardiomyo-pathy: etiological considerations. Morin, Y.L. and Daniel, P. C.M.A.J. 97, 926-928,
1967.
10. Cobalt cardiomyopathy. A report of two cases from mineral assay laboratories and a review of the literature. Jarvis,
J.Q. et al. J. Occup. Med. 34, 620-626, 1992.
11. Review of the physiological effects of amyl, butyl, and isobutyl nitrites. Haley, T.J. Clin. Tox. 16, 317-329, 1980.

5-30

6.1. Skin Anatomy. 2
6.2. Skin Penetration . 3
6.2.1. Mechanical . 3
6.2.2. Solvents . 3
6.2.3. Aqueous Solutions .3
6.2.4. Pesticides . 3
6.3. Skin Metabolism. 5
6.4. Contact Dermatitis .5
6.4.1. Mechanism of Dermatitis .6
6.5. Allergic Sensitization .7
6.6. Chloracne . 9
6.7. Skin Carcinogens . 9
6.8. Barriers. 10
6.9. Sunlight . 10
6.9.1. Ultra-Violet Radiation . 10
6.9.2. Phototoxicity . 12
6.9.3. Photoallergy. 13
6.10. Testing . 13
6.10.1. Ocular Irritation: Draize . 13
6.10.2. Dermal Irritancy. 14
6.10.3. Irritection-Corrositex vs Draize . 16
6.10.3.1. Substitute Ocular Tests. 16
6.10.3.2. Substitute Skin Tests . 17
6.10.4. Clinical Patch Tests . 18
6.11. Case Study: Carbamate and Propanil Pesticide case and
Chloracne . 19

6-1

and digest their prey. But only a few spiders are of lethal
consequence to humans, because they possess fangs large
enough to penetrate human skin.

6.

The skin is composed of three layers (F6.1),
- the stratum corneum (horny layer),
- the underlying epidermis, the clear cell layer and
- the subcutaneous complex dermis containing nerve
endings, muscle fibers, eccrine (sweat) glands,
sebaceous glands, hair follicles, connective tissue,
lymphatic channels, blood capillaries, lipids, etc.
The stratum corneum of dead keratinized cells is the principal
barrier layer, composed of high lipid but low water content.
The normal role of this layer is to retain water and heat (against
dehydration and hypothermia), and to prevent the entrance of
microorganisms and most toxic substances.
The epidermis is a compacted layer of epithelial cells with tight
junctions in the stratum granulosum.
The dermis, underlying the epidermis, is composed of diverse
types of cells including hair follicles, sebaceous glands, eccrine
(sweat) glands with a dense capillary bed and good blood flow.
F6.1. Cross-section of the skin. Fox, 2004.

Heat control is managed by perspiration release, cooling of the
surface and heat exchange through the capillary bed.

Skin is the largest "organ", weighing some 3.5 kg (6% of
body weight) and covering an area of 2 m2 in the average
adult. 40% of occupational diseases involve the skin, resulting
in prolonged discomfort and expense.

Dermatologists claim that female skin is more susceptible to
dermatitis, although there is no specific measurement to
document this. It seems also that women are more often
sensitive to allergens as opposed to irritants. For example,
contact allergy to nickel is found in 15% of women vs 2% of
men.

6.1. Skin Anatomy
There are tens of thousands of types of spiders, and practically
all of them are venemous, because they require venom to kill
6-2

6.2.3. Aqueous Solutions

6.2. Skin Penetration

Little attention has been paid to the absorption of organic
chemicals "dissolved" in aqueous solutions, e.g. wastewater,
even potable drinking water used for bathing. The study of a
component of gasoline, ethylbenzene, either pure or in aqueous
solution, showed that the rate of absorption through human
skin was higher for the agent (112 -156 mg/l) in aqueous
solution (118-215 µg/cm2/hr) than when applied pure (22-33
µg/cm2/hr)4. More recent studies, examining the dermal
absorption of toluene, ethylbenzene and styrene in aqueous
solutions, representative of drinking water contamination,
revealed that the dermal absorption of these contaminants has
been consistently underestimated5.
Skin penetration of chemicals in aqueous solution tends to
decrease exponentially with molecular weight, and to increase
with POW as well as with their water solubility.

Absorption of chemicals from the skin depends on surface
area (T6.2), on skin thickness (T6.3) and on exposure (F6.4).
Alcohol in the blood is known to increase toxic compound
absorption through the skin. The barrier is imperfect, and
substances can penetrate under unfavorable conditions. The
efficient absorption in the scrotal area (T6.3, 29%), for
example, brings to mind Sir Percival Pott's scrotal cancer cases
in young chimneysweeps, the efficient regional absorption of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons causing the localized cancers
! The epidermis is replaced about once a month, the stratum
corneum about once every two weeks. Therefore, should
penetration be exceedingly slow, the toxicant will eventually
be shed.
6.2.1. Mechanical
The stratum corneum is breached (by cuts, abrasions or pilar
openings). In the occupational setting, workers' hands always
have cuts, nicks, and scratches and, in any dermal irritancy test,
both intact and abraded skin are tested, since the effects might
be quite different. Intact skin is a reasonable barrier whereas
"damaged skin" (repeatedly stripped with cellophane tape to
remove the stratum corneum) allows 5-fold more benzene to
penetrate.

6.2.4. Pesticides
Measurement of parathion absorption in pesticide application
(F6.4) reveals that the forearms and hands account for 33 to
86% of the entire dermal dose1. On the basis of T6.2, T6.3 and
F6.4, one could minimize exposure to pesticides by providing
solvent-impervious gloves and appropriate headgear. This is
what is recommended on many pesticide container labels, in
addition to wearing an apron or coveralls while mixing and
loading.
These experiments can be extrapolated to industrial chemicals
such as benzene, PCBs, and nitroaniline, the results
demonstrating a significant acquisition of agent in the
epidermis (surface bound to stratum corneum) and dermis, as
well as absorbed systemically6.

6.2.2. Solvents
Potentially toxic chemical dissolved in an organic solvent
(gasoline, oils, trichloro-ethylene, toluene, xylenes, ketones)
can penetrate more easily. Rubber solvent, in which traces
(0.35%) of benzene occurred, did not enhance the absorption of
benzene on single exposure, but did upon repeated exposure or
upon application to the palm of the hand8.

6-3

T6.2. Surface of body regions in percent1.
Body Region
Surface Area (% of total)
Head
5.6
Neck
1.2
Upper arms
9.7
Forearms
6.7
Hands
6.9
Chest, back, shoulders
22.8
Hips
9.1
Thighs
18.0
Calves
13.5
Feet
6.4
T6.3. Urinary excretion of 14C-parathion metabolites
reflecting absorption rates from different anatomical sites3.
% of dose excreted in urine
Region of Application
over 24 hrs
Forearm
1.77
Palm
2.45
Abdomen
3.86
Hand (dorsum)
6.03
Fossa cubitalis (elbow crease)
7.95
Scalp
8.88
Jaw angle
10.92
Post auricular (behind ear)
10.45
Forehead
10.96
Axilla (arm pit)
18.54
Scrotum
28.85

F6.4. Pesticide absorption by region:
% contribution to total dose.

6-4

hydrocarbon receptor. This receptor is known for binding
environmental toxicants, but it also regulates the balance of
protein and anti-inflammatory responses of the immune
system. Exposures to environmental toxicants such as dioxin
may encourage the development of autoimmune diseases.

T6.5. Performance of Cutaneous Defense.
Variable
Black Skin Caucasian Skin
Abrasion resistance
16
9
(strippings)
Stratum corneum layers
21.8
16.7
Density by sucrose
1.18
1.11
gradient centrifugation
Thickness (µm)
6.5
7.2
Density (gm/ml)
1.68
1.39
Permeability to water
0.4
1.4
(ml/cm2 per 24 hrs)

Many of the enzyme activities induced in the skin are directed
against invaders such as bacteria and fungi, explaining why
some have a toxic component. In the case of many
petrochemical exposures, the enzyme AHH transforms
chemicals landed on the skin into other compounds of stronger
carcinogenic activity.
People who have psoriasis (a hereditary skin disease) cannot be
induced for AHH. When exposed to coal tar, these people do
not develop higher rates of skin cancer.

6.3. Skin Metabolism
The skin has metabolic functions like any other organ, among
which:

Skin tissue is rich in immune cells. Vaccines could be injected
into the skin using about 20% of the dose used in intramuscular injection, and still obtain the same protection.
A tight network of cells covering the entire body is formed in
the skin by Langerhans cells. These cells ingest antigens
present in the skin and transport them to lymph nodes,
activating the immune system to protect the body against
pathogens.

1. Synthesis of Porphyrins (cytochromes without the iron) and
Heme (respiratory pigments),
2. Production of cytochromes P-450 and P-448,
3. Oxidation of Heme, Alcohols and Aromatic Rings,
4. Alicyclic Hydroxylation,
5. Deamination,
6. Reduction of Carbonyls and C=C,
7. Conjugation: Glucoronidation, Sulfation, Methylation.

6.4. Contact Dermatitis
Contact Dermatitis, a most common injury, can be caused by
any substance and takes a wide variety of clinical forms:

Some of the skin enzymes, specifically
aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase (AHH),
epoxide hydratase and
glutathione-S-transferase,

Erythema (reddening of the skin)
Purpura (bruise-like)
Blistering
Eczema, urticaria
Rashes (weeping and oozing)

can be strongly induced by repeated exposure to polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons and coal tar through the aryl
6-5

Erosions of skin
Hyperkeratosis (thickening, swelling)
Pustules (small infections)
Dryness and roughness (scales, itching)

T6.6. Skin Irritants in Industry
Water eliminates natural oils and swells live epidermal cells.
Cleaners solubilize-disorganize barrier lipids and natural
moisturizing factors in the stratum corneum, denaturate protein,
intoxicate membranes.

6.4.1. Mechanism of Dermatitis
The effect usually occurs locally on the skin surface,
from the degreasing, dehydrating, protein denaturation and
osmotic pressure change induced by the toxic agent.
The resulting inflammation destroys the stratum corneum,
allowing invasion by bacteria and a localized immune
response. The condition may be difficult to treat, and persist for
some time.
Once through the barrier, the toxicant may penetrate deeper
into the subcutaneous layer and exert an effect on the
pilosebaceous follicles, resulting in acneiform eruptions,
aggravated by hot humid working conditions and exposure to
grease and heavy oils.

Soaps, Detergents, Bleach.

Oxidants and reducing agents (cytotoxicity, keratolysis).
Plant products, animal protein penetrate the skin through
follicular shunts.
Alkalis denaturate barrier lipids, swell cells.

Inorganic: alkaline sulphides, barium hydrate and carbonate, sodium hydrate,
carbonate, silicate and metasilicate, potassium hydrate and carbonate,
ammonium hydrate and carbonate, calcium oxide, hydrate carbonate and
cyanamide, trisodium phosphate.
Organic: Ethanolamines, Methylamine.

Acids denaturate protein, induce cytotoxicity.
Inorganic: Arsenious, Hydrofluoric, Chloroplatinic, Hydrofluosilic,
Chlorosulphonic, Nitric, Chromic, Perchloric, Hydriotic, Phosphoric,
Hydrobromic, Sulphuric, Hydrochloric.
Organic: Acetic, Maleic, Carbolic, Metanilic, Cresylic, Oxalic, Formic,
Salicylic, Lactic.

There is a fair degree of individual variation among subjects.
If DMSO (a test compound) in a concentration above 80% is
put on the skin, stinging is produced in some subjects within
minutes, in others within hours, with still others, you give up
waiting…
Between 5 and 20% of the population can be classified as
“stingers” because of their high susceptibility to many
chemicals.

Elements and their salts:
Antimony and salts, Mercuric salts, Arsenic and salts, Nickel salts,
Chromium and alkaline chromates, Zinc chloride, Copper sulphate, Silver
nitrate, Copper cyanide.

Solvents solubilize barrier lipids, intoxicate membranes.

A large variety of compounds (T6.6) produce contact
dermatitis. Generally (in increasing order of irritancy),

Petroleum solvents, Turpentine, Coal tar solvents, Terpenes,
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, Carbon bisulphide, Esters, Alcohols, Ketones.

Acne producers disorganize barrier lipids.

Alkanes < Alcohols < Aldehydes or ketones < Organic acids < Amines

Petroleum oils, Chloronaphthalenes, Cutting oils, Chlorodiphenyls, Pitch,
Chlorodiphenyloxides, Tar, Solid chlorobenzols, Paraffin, Solid
chlorophenols.

Some compounds, like anthralin (a psoriasis medicine) induce
an irritant response delayed by 8 to 24 hours.
6-6

The natural pH of skin being 5.5, substances within the range
of 5.5 to 7.4 are usually well tolerated by the skin.
In industry, the activities most likely to be associated with skin
diseases are mixing, blending and grinding, painting coating
and printing, dyeing, plastic processing, rubber compounding,
mining, metal fabrication and woodworking.
F6.7. Chronic eczematous
contact dermatitis caused
by leather components in
a hatband.

F6.8. Mechanism of allergic sensitization.

sensitization is 10-21 days, and delay in reaction is 12-48
hours. With successive exposures to an allergen, an individual
develops red spots often similar to eczema (with or without
edema) which appear more rapidly and remain longer in later
repeats.
Low molecular weight inorganics can cause allergic
sensitization (ex: nickel, chromium in jewelry), but organics
such as perfumes can also cause allergy.
95% of substances in perfumes are actually synthetics derived
from petroleum. 26 such contact allergens must be identified in
perfumes, if marketed in the European Union:

6.5. Allergic Sensitization
Allergic Contact Dermatitis is a cell-mediated reaction (F6.8)
that accounts for 30% of all occupational skin diseases. It may,
in extreme cases, result in total permanent disability, in part
because ordinary protective measures often prove ineffective in
view of the small amounts of agent necessary to trigger
reactions.
With so-called contact dermatitis “irritants”, a previous
exposure is not necessary, whereas for contact dermatitis
“allergy”, a previous exposure IS necessary. Typical delay in

Amyl cinnamal, Benzyl alcohol, Cinnamyl alcohol, Citral, Eugenol, Hydroxycitronellal, Isoeugenol, Amylcin namyl alcohol, Benzyl salicylate, Cinnamal,
Coumarin, Geraniol, Hydroxy-methylpentylcyclohexenecarboxaldehyde, Anisyl
alcohol, Benzyl cinnamate, Farnesol, 2-(4-tert-Butylbenzyl)

6-7

European Union Regulations 2010 on Cosmetic Products
Propionaldehyde, Linalool, Benzyl benzoate, Citronellol, Hexyl cinnam-aldehyde,
d-Limonene, Methyl heptin carbonate, 3-Methyl-4-(2,6,6-trimethyl-2-cyclohexen-1yl)-3-buten-2-one, Oak moss extract and Tree moss extract.

Cosmetics include aromatherapy products, but exclude products used solely as
medicines. The regulation forbids cosmetic products that may cause damage to human
health when applied under normal conditions of use, or reasonably foreseeable
conditions of use.
Animal Testing
Forbids testing a finished cosmetic, any of its ingredients or combination of
ingredients, on an animal in order that the product may comply with Regulations and
the manufacturer must not have tested or commissioned tests on animals of the
finished product or its prototype or any of their ingredients. The cosmetic product must
also not contain any ingredients that have been tested on animals by others for the
purpose of developing new cosmetic products. These restrictions apply where there are
authorized alternative methods of test (from 11 March 2013, to tests involving
repeated dose toxicity, reproductive toxicity or toxicokinetics).
“Best Before”
If minimum durability is 30 months or less, it must be marked with a 'best-before' date.
If minimum durability is more than 30 months, it must be marked with the period after
opening for which the product can be used without harming the consumer.
Information available from the 'responsible person'
A responsible person is required to keep certain product information at the registered
office address or the address detailed on the product. The product information must
include the composition of the product. For perfume or perfume compositions in the
product, you are only required to keep the name, code number and supplier identity.
Qualitative information for all composites, and the quantitative information in relation
to dangerous substances, must also be made easily available to the general public,
 
the physico-chemical and microbiological specifications of the raw materials
and the finished product, and the purity and microbiological control criteria
of the cosmetic product,
  the method of manufacture, which shall be in accordance with good
manufacturing practice,
  an assessment of safety for human health of the finished product, including
the criteria as stipulated in the Regulations. There are additional criteria
where the product is intended for use on children under three years old or
exclusively for use in external intimate hygiene,
  the name and address of the person or persons, with the minimum
qualifications as detailed in the Regulations, who carried out the
assessments,
  existing data on the undesirable effects on human health resulting from use
of the product. This information must also be made easily available to the
general public,
  evidence to justify any claims made by the product,
  data on any animal testing performed by the manufacturer, his agents or
suppliers, relating to the development or safety evaluation of the product or
its ingredients,
  there is a procedure detailed in the Regulations that, subject to agreement,
allows the confidentiality of some ingredients to be maintained.

In digestive allergy, it is known that a larger time to breakdown
in the gut for a protein means that it is more likely to be an
allergen.
The term “atopy” designates an increased genetic
susceptibility to the development of occupational dermatitis
due to immune cell hyperreactivity. Atopic dermatitis is a Tcell mediated, eczematous skin disorder that affects 1% to 3%
of adults.
Multiple chemical sensitivity is an adverse reaction to low
levels of many common chemicals. Symptoms may occur after
toxicant exposure by inhalation or contact. Clinical ecologists
believe MCS is a form of immune dysfunction caused by the
insidious accumulation of exogenous chemicals over a lifetime.
Another biologically oriented hypothesis is that MCS
represents an atypical biological consequence of chemical
injury, or injury to the respiratory tract after an acute
inhalational episode. A more recent concept has focused on the
relationship between the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract

F6.9. Appearance of allergic reactions.

6-8

and the limbic (nervous) system. Whatever the case, it seems
likely that cures for these hypersensitivity reactions will be
related to reducing by apoptosis the populations of rogue Tcells.

F6.12. Chloracneogens.

They bind to the AHH
receptor, which is also
involved, beyond skin
metabolism, in a number
of developmental
pathways. Various
vitamin-A derivatives
such as tretinoin and
retinoic acid have been
useful in treating
chloracne.

F6.10. The 1 and 2 Euro coins have been found to
release large amounts of nickel in part because
they contain two alloys, which create an
electrochemical potential. The corrosion is
apparent when coins are immersed in artificial
sweat (right). Ni triggers allergic reactions18.

The prevalence of natural rubber latex allergy has been
estimated to be 5–18% in health care workers, and latex
exposure has been one of the leading causes of occupational
asthma in the last several years.

6.6. Chloracne
F6.11. Case of Chloracne.

6.7. Skin Carcinogens

Chloracne is a more
severe and specific
form of acne which
could be labeled
environmental halogen
acne.
Clinically, it is similar
to severe acne vulgaris,
with comedones (“black heads” from obstruction of sebum
evacuation, creating a harbor for bacteria), persistent papules
(no pus) or pustules, with a frequent eczema component.
Dioxins and Furans (
), among other chemicals, are noted
for producing chloracne (F6.12).

The substances currently accepted as Cutaneous Carcinogens
are:
Ionizing radiation: X-rays, -rays, -rays, energetic
particles, protons, neutrons,
Ultra-Violet light at 256-320 nm,
Physical trauma,
Inorganic arsenic,
Polycyclic hydrocarbons: Benzo[a]pyrene, 3methylcholanthrene, dibenzanthracene, 7,12dimethylbenzanthracene.

6-9

Chromium Skin Lesions
Workers performing chrome plating with exposure to hexavalent
chromium from time to time will develop chrome ulcers on their
skin (usually hands). Such ulcers have a very distinctive
appearance—a “punched out” lesion, frequently with a remaining
central core, or ‘umbilicus’, that seems to contain semi-necrotic
tissue.
A typical practice would remove the exposure & treat any
secondary infections. Healing may take weeks to months.
Some experienced platers (several with >30 years in the plating
business) self-treat, shelling out the core of necrotic tissue using a
crude, non-sterile excision, and they swear that their ulcers heal at
least twice as fast.
Another strategy could be to reduce chromium (VI) to the
relatively benign chromium(III) within the ulcer using topical
ascorbic acid (effective in a guinea pig model).

6.8. Barriers
Creams are relatively ineffective against dermatitis, perhaps
except for the case of oil-based barrier creams against a wet
environment.

6.9. Sunlight
6.9.1. Ultra-Violet Radiation

F6.13. “A”, “B” and “C” Ultra-Violet radiation.

“Within the chrome plating industry in the West Midlands (Great
Britain) some platers treat their chrome ulcers with a substance
known locally as 'Black Jack' which is an icthamol paste applied
as an anti-inflammatory agent to the open wound.” Icthamol is rich
in ferrous iron, which would also reduce chromium (VI) to
Chromium (III).

Sunlight is distributed according to frequency: infrared (> 700
nm, 49.4%), visible (400-700 nm, 42.3%, UVA (400-320 nm,
6.3%), UVB (320-290 nm, 1.5%), UVC (< 290 nm, 0.5%).
The intact skin is not a barrier to sunlight, particularly to the
UVB radiation, the type that causes sunburn.

Anthracenes are a family of aromatics with
3 benzenes in line (left).

Sun burning cells using UV radiation triggers Fas-mediated
apoptosis of keratinocytes25.

The polycyclic hydrocarbons are found in
soot, pitch, coal tar, creosote; shale,
mineral, petroleum and cutting oils. Petroleum products can
be activated by skin enzymes or sunlight.

Exposure to UVB when young seems very important in
determining the incidence of the various forms of skin cancer
later in life. This is why occupational compensation would be
limited for such a disease.

6-10

The various forms of skin cancer are:
Melanoma, the deadliest form, involves the pigment-producing
cells, melanocytes, from the lower layer of the epidermis. It
can develop from a mole or on unblemished skin, grows
quickly and can metastasize.
Basal-cell carcinoma: The most common, usually caused by
excessive sun exposure. From the lower layer of the epidermis,
it develops slowly, rarely metastasizes and is nearly 100%
curable if treated.
Squamous-cell carcinoma: from the cells in the upper layer of
the epidermis, caused by UV rays, it is usually curable if
treated early. Grows faster than basal cell carcinoma and can
metastasize.
People with some history of artificial light tanning are 1.5
times more likely to have basal-cell carcinoma and 2.5 times
more likely to have squamous-cell carcinoma. If they began
before the age of 20, the risks are 1.8 and 3.625. Young adults
are experiencing a sharp increase in non-melanoma skin
cancers, probably as a result of full body tanning27.
F6.15. A former lifeguard in Australia shows
the location of his removed skin cancer lesions
(more than 532). Although such cancers are not
often lethal, having them correlates with other
types of cancers.
National Geographic, November 2002.

F6.14. Penetration of Ultra-Violet Radiation into the Skin.

Although sunlight is the most frequent
cause of skin pigmentation, coal tar and
other petrochemical substances may
increase pigmentation, while paratertiary

Scientific American.

6-11

butyl phenols and cathecols (aside) can
depigment the skin.
Uneven pigmentation can also occur
from heat or microwave exposures.
6.9.2. Phototoxicity
In phototoxicity, a chemical is converted into dermally toxic
compounds by sunlight in the skin.
UVA, 315-400 nm, can activate chemicals into phototoxic or
photoallergic agents. The result is similar to contact
dermatitis7. A phototoxic or photoallergic reaction can be
produced with either a dermally acquired chemical or one
taken systemically, such as a drug. The first photoreactive
chemicals identified were drugs, the sulphonamides,
phenothiazines, and tetracyclines. They caused acute dermatitis
following ingestion and exposure to sunlight.
Phototoxicity is usually seen as a delayed erythema followed
by hyperpigmentation and desquamation, e.g. a sunburn
followed by more severe effects (photo-products with nucleic
acids or membrane damage). As can be see in F6.16, these
chemicals usually have large complex ring structures
(halogenated benzenes) or interlocking, planar aromatic rings
(phenanthrene, anthracene) or multi-rings. Such phototoxicity
is independent of immune or allergic mechanisms and can
occur in anyone if enough light energy and the concentration of
drug in the skin is high enough.
F6.16. Phototoxic chemicals in humans.

6-12

There are a variety of well known drugs that are
photoallergens, and more and more industrial chemicals are
showing similar properties.

6.9.3. Photoallergy
Photoallergy is an acquired, altered reactivity to UV
irradiation that is dependent on an antigen-antibody or cellmediated hypersensitivity response. While relatively
uncommon, such reactions are similar to an exaggerated
sunburn response and may be immediate (solar urticaria with
transient wheal and flare reactions) or delayed (papular and
eczematous). Most investigators consider that a cell-mediated
(T-cell) immunity is involved, because the characteristic
responses observed are similar to that seen in contact allergic
reactions, e.g. poison ivy (active ingredient - urushiol).
Eventually, as the individual becomes sensitized to the agent,
spots will appear at other, often covered, sites on the body
where contact with the agent has not occurred. Such conditions
have all the appearance of a developing immunity, with time
and frequency of exposure being the relevant factors.

T6.18. Chemicals used in
identifying photoallergy.
Dichlorophene
Bithionol
Hexachlorophene
4,4’-dichloro-3-(trifluoromethyl)
carbanilide
3,4,4’-trichlorocarbanilide
3,5-dibromosalicylanilide
3,4’,5-tribromosalicylanilide
2,3,4,5-tetrabromosalicylanilide
6-methylcoumarin
Musk ambrette

F6.17. Photo contact dermatitis
often involves areas
exposed to the sun.

6.10. Testing

Since the chemicals that
induce such reactions are
ubiquitous and may be found
in washing powders
(brighteners), in perfumes,
lotions, creams, etc. (bergamot
oil containing bergapten),
antibacterials (3,5-dibromo-salicylanilide), emulsifiable cutting
oils (petroleum sulphonates, bactericides, rust inhibitors nitrates and nitrites), it is extremely difficult to identify the
toxicant. T6.18 shows a short list of chemicals used in
identifying photoallergies.

6.10.1. Ocular Irritation: Draize
Accidental eye exposure is a major concern. Irrigation of the
eyes is the universal method of treatment for all serious eye
exposures. It can be done in a shower, drinking fountain or by
blinking in a full sink.
Although the lens includes structural proteins for neutralization
of toxins such as glutathione-S-transferase, and heat-shock
proteins, it is still very vulnerable.
If an agent is irritative dermally, there is no need to test it in the
eye, since eye membranes are more susceptible than the skin’s.
There is no need to test strong acids and bases, as well as most
moderate irritants in the eye. But marginal cases, like a baby
6-13

shampoo, where the chance of getting it into the eyes of a child
at some time are 100%, should be investigated. If such a
product must be safe, how do you test it ?
To provide appropriate safety messages on the labels and
MSDSs, there is a testing requirement for chemicals. This need
was first answered by the Draize ocular test (1944)9. It scores
the physiological reactions in the cornea, conjunctiva and iris
(T6.19). The test is:
(1) subjectively rated, the simple scoring system varying
slightly with methodologies9,10,
(2) vulnerable to interspecies differences.
There appears to be less interspecies variability with strong
irritants or with non-irritants; the differences occur mostly with
moderate irritants. Draize selected the rabbit as a test animal
because it was more sensitive, thereby providing a margin of
safety for human exposure2, and could display a dose-effect
relationship. This test was not satisfactory for all agents; for
some, the rabbit eye was not as sensitive as the human eye.

F6.19. Anatomy of the lower half of the eyeball.

6.10.2. Dermal Irritancy

The basic test has changed little in the past 58 years, although
smaller volumes (0.1 ml > 0.01 ml) of chemical are now used
to reduce adverse effects, while still allowing assessment of
potential toxicity.
Various techniques to measure changes in corneal thickness
have been tested, specifically a slit lamp perpendicular to the
corneal apex. The measurements are accurate to 0.01 mm4.
Five measurements are made at each time point (0, 24, 48, and
72 hr post-treatment).

In view of the frequency of accidental splashes and spills, it is
important to have MSDS data on the irritating or corrosive
effects of a chemical on the skin. Again, the most successful
test (T6.20) was proposed by Draize9.
Most suitable animals possess a good fur coat which can be
shaved, leaving only a fine stubble. There are strains of mice
and guinea pigs that are hairless or "nude": sad looking,
wrinkled things that generate sympathy. There is no agreement
on which skin is morphologically closest to the human skin.

6-14

human skin. However, dermal irritation studies are usually
conducted in a specific animal species for simple practical
reasons, selection usually having little to do with any similarity
to the human skin.

T6.20. Eye irritation test: grading ocular lesions.
From Draize, J. H., Woodard, G., and Calvery, H. 0., J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 82:377-390 (1944).

DESCRIPTION OF LESION
I. I.

#

I. CORNEA: A. Opacity, degree of density
Scattered or diffuse areas of opacity, but details of iris clearly visible
Easily discernible translucent areas, details of the iris slightly obscured
Opalescent areas. no details of iris visible, size of pupil barely discernible
Opaque cornea, iris invisible through opacity
I. CORNEA: B. Area of cornea involved
One quarter (or less), but not zero
Greater than one quarter
Greater than one half
Greater than three quarters, up to complete area

1
2
3
4

T6.21. Skin irritation test: grading skin lesions.
Skin responses
Erythema and Eschar Formation
No erythema
Very slight erythema (barely perceptible)
Well-defined erythema
Moderate-to-severe erythema
Severe erythema (beet redness) to slight eschar formation
(injury in depth)
Edema Formation
No edema
Very slight edema (barely perceptible)
Slight edema (edges of area well-defined by definite raising)
Moderate edema (raised approximately 1.0 mm)
Severe edema (raised more than 1.0 mm and extending
beyond the area of exposure)

1
2
3
4

Score = Part A x Part B x 5 --- maximum score = 80
II. IRIS: A. Normal
Folds above normal, congestion, swelling circumcorneal injection, iris light-reacting
No reaction to light, hemorrhage, gross destruction
Score = Part A

x

5 ---- maximum score = 10

1
2

III. CONJUNCTIVA: A. Redness (refers to palpebral conjunctiva)
Blood vessels hyperemic (injected)
Diffuse, crimson color, individual vessels not easily discernible
Diffuse vessels, beefy red
III. CONJUNCTIVA: B. Chemosis (lids and nictitating membranes)
Any swelling above normal (includes the nictitating membranes)
Obvious swelling with partial eversion of lids
Swelling with lids half closed
Swelling with lids more than half closed
III. CONJUNCTIVA: C. Discharge
Not normal (ignore small amounts observed in inner canthus of normal animals)
Discharge with moistening of lids and hairs adjacent to lids
Discharge with moistening of the lids and hairs of considerable area around eye
Score = (Parts A + B + C) x 2 --- maximum score = 20

1
2
3

Value
0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2
3
4

Two effects are observed on skin during the 24, 48 and 72
hours post-exposure: erythema (redness) and edema (puffiness
or swelling).
It comes down to how red is red and to what degree is swelling
seen. A numbering system or grading score has been developed
for the two parameters which is dependent upon the skill of the
investigator or technician to "grade" the severity of the
biological response (See T6.21).
Having scored each animal for erythema and edema, obtained
average scores for each parameter and incorporated them
together, one is left with interpreting them for the products.
A scheme used by NIOSH is shown in T6.21. Based on these
ratings, numbers generated in the test can be converted into
label warnings and safety information in the MSDS (T6.22).
In the case of dermal sensitization studies, the animal of
choice is usually the guinea pig, although rabbits can be used,

1
2
3
4
1
2
3

Investigators use rodents, guinea pigs and rabbits, all of which
have sensitive skin. Larger animals such as swine, minipigs,
and dogs may also be used. For a wide range of chemicals, the
skin of the rhesus monkey is considered to best mimic the
6-15

both being reactive and sensitive. Essentially, the chemical of
interest is applied to the skin daily over a 14-day period and,
following a resting period of 10-to-14 days, the animals receive
a challenge dose of the agent, usually a lower concentration
than was applied earlier. A positive flare-and-wheal reaction,
usually dose-dependent, signifies that sensitization has
occurred.

pain, and use too many animals because of the variability in
response.
6.10.3.1. Substitute Ocular Tests

Many promising alternative ocular tests, some of which are
being accepted by regulatory agencies, have been developed,
including isolated cornea, enucleated eyes, cultures of corneal
and lens cells as well as non-animal preparations11. This still
leaves the problem of a suitable species from which to obtain
the eyes for the ex vivo tests. The results of a comparative
study sponsored by the Commission of European Communities
revealed that the enucleated chicken eye appeared to be the
most practicable when compared with the eyes of swine and
cattle and tested with a number of well known chemicals15. The
Chicken Enucleated Eye Test (CEET) recognizes three levels
of irritancy. Since large numbers of chicken eyes can be
obtained at little cost from slaughterhouses, this test would
appear to satisfy animal rights groups and still give a valid
assessment of ocular toxicity. A competing technique uses
isolated (enucleated) eyes following euthanasia of the rabbit,
incubating in vitro (or ex vivo) with the test toxicant, with
corneal thickness measurement with the slit lamp12. Comparing
the ex vivo and in vivo tests has demonstrated that materials
capable of causing ocular injury caused an intensification of
the stromal image and swelling of the cornea with a good
correlation between in vivo ocular damage and ex vivo results14.
Since animal lenses can be cultured over days or weeks with
their optics and repair mechanisms intact, even chronic
changes as well as recovery can be documented. Variables used
to gauge toxicity can be as simple as changes in the focal
length of the lens, as shown below for three common corneal
anesthetics.

T6.22. NIOSH interpretation of skin testing ratings.
McCreesh and Steinberg, 1983

Rating
Intact
Abraded
Skin
Skin
0-0.9
1-1.9
2-4.0
0-0.9
1-1.9
2-4.0

Interpretation
Nonirritant: probably safe for intact
human skin contact
Mild irritant: may be safe for use
but appropriate protective measures
are recommended
Too irritant for human skin contact:
avoid contact
Nontoxic to cellular components of
abraded skin: probably safe for
human skin contact
Mild cellular toxins: may be safe
for abraded skin contact
Cellular toxicant too irritant for
abraded skin contact: avoidance of
contact is advised

6.10.3. Irritection-Corrositex vs Draize
The descriptions of T6.20 and T6.21 have attracted the
attention of animal rights activists, who have campaigned to
eliminate such studies on the basis that they inflict needless
6-16

6.10.3.2. Substitute Skin Tests

solution. The reagent solution contains proteins, glycoproteins,
lipids and low molecular weight components that self-associate
to form insoluble matrices. The toxic changes are measured
over 5 hours using turbidity readings.
Most of the new in vitro tests offer considerable simplicity,
economy and speed. Some things are lost from the animal
models. The opportunity to observe many variables (as
opposed to only a change in color or turbidity), to make
chronic observations over time (as opposed to a few hours).
Certainly the new tests are simpler to interpret. But simplicity
of interpretation goes in hand with paucity of output
information. The usefulness of the tests depends on how
carefully they are designed and researched.

The development of synthetic skin tests has also been
intensive. “Corrositex” is an in vitro test that determines
chemical corrosivity and allows assignment to packing group
specifications. It replaces the rabbit skin test. It is based on a
glass vial filled with a chemical detection system, and capped

F6.23. Effect of focal length of bovine lens from three eye anesthetics.

by a bio-membrane. After a potentially corrosive chemical is
placed on the membrane, the chemical detection system may
become colored.

F6.24. When cultivated at the air-liquid interface in chemically defined
medium, the transformed human corneal epithelial cells of the cell line
HCE form a corneal epithelial tissue (mucosa), devoid of stratum
corneum, resembling ultrastructurally (tissue morphology and
thickness) the corneal mucosa of the human eye.

“ Irritection” is a quantitative in vitro test that ranks ocular and
dermal irritation potential of cosmetics, consumer products,
pharmaceuticals and raw industrial chemicals.
The chemical under investigation is placed on a membrane that
permits controlled delivery of the material to a reagent
6-17

6.10.4. Clinical Patch Tests
People may need to be tested for their reaction to chemicals.
Allergens are tested either in a petrolatum or aqueous vehicle
in Finn chambers (F6.25), essentially a filter paper used to
contain water preparations, The patches are maintained on
the skin for 2 days. Reactions are graded one hour after the
tape is removed. They are normally conducted with nonirritant concentration, to determine an hyper-sensitivity
specific to a patient.
When there is greater reaction at the edge of the patch, this
usually denotes irritation rather than allergy. Depigmentation
can sometimes result from exposure to test chemicals.
Sub-cutaneous injections (F6.26) can also be used.

F6.26. Allergic sensitivity tests using sub-cutaneous injections.

The large number of chemicals that can be used in various
versions of the clinical patch tests speaks to the variety of
possible cutaneous reactions.
T6.27. Chemicals used in diagnostic patch testing. Unless noted,
chemicals are in petrolatum in the first two columns. Chemicals present
in more than one column are in bold.

F6.25. Finn chambers for
allergic sensitivity tests in
patients.

North American Contact
Dermatitis Group
1
2

Benzocaine, 5%
Mercaptobenzothiazole, 1%

3
4

Colophony, 20%
Paraphenylenediamine base,
1%
Imidazolidinyl urea, 2%
aqueous
Cinnamic aldehyde, 1%
Lanolin alcohol, 30%
Carbamix mix, 3%
9. Neomycin sulfate, 20%
Thiuram mix, 1%
Formaldehyde, 1% aqueous

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

6-18

Ethylenediamine
dihydrochloride, 1%
Epoxy resin, 1%
Quaternium 15, 2%
p-tert-Butylphenol
formaldehyde resin, 1%

European Contact
Dermatitis Group
Potassium dichromate 0.5%
Paraphenylenediamine base,
1%
Thiuram mix, 1%
Neomycin sulfate, 20%
Cobalt chloride, 1%

Thin Layer Rapid-use
Epicutaneous Test
(allergens)
Nickel sulfate 0.2 mg/cm²
Wool alcohols 1.00 g/cm²
Neomycin sulfate 0.23 mg/cm²
Potassium dichromate 0.023
mg/cm²
Caine mix 0.63 mg/cm²

Benzocaine, 5%
Nickel sulfate, 5%
Clioquinol, 5%
9. Colophony, 20%
Paraben mix, 8%
N-isopropyl-Nphenylparaphenylenediamine,
0.1%
Wool alcohols, 30%

Fragrance mix 0.43 mg/cm²
Colophony 0.85 mg/cm²
Epoxy resin 0.05 mg/cm²
Quinoline mix 0.19 mix/cm²
Balsam of Peru 0.80 mg/cm²
Ethylenediamine
dihydrochloride 0.05 mg/cm²

Mercaptomix, 2%

p-tert-Butylphenol
formaldehyde resin 0.04
mg/cm²
Paraben mix 1 mg/cm²
Carbamix 0.25 mg/cm²

Epoxy resin, 1%
Balsam of Peru, 25%

Cobalt dichloride 0.02 mg/cm²

16

Mercaptomix, 1%

17

Black rubber mix, 0.6%

p-tert-Butylphenol
formaldehyde resin, 1%
Mercaptobenzothiazole, 2%

18
19

Potassium dichromate, 0.25%
Balsam of Peru, 25%

Formaldehyde, 1%
Fragrance mix, 8%

20

Nickel sulfate, 2.5%

Sesquiterpene lactone mix

21
22
23
24

Quaternium 15, 1%
Primin, 0.01%
Cl + Me-isothiazolinone,
0.01% aqueous

not possible to demonstrate that very well. Workers also moved freely from one area
into another, and many had been exposed to both compounds.

Black rubber mix 0.075
mg/cm²
Cl+Me-isothiazolinone 0.0040
mg/cm² (Kathon CG)
Quaternium 15 0.1 mg/cm²
Mercaptobenzothiazole 0.075
mg/cm²
Paraphenylenediamine
(PPD), 0.090 mg/cm²
Formaldehyde 0.18 mg/cm²
Mercaptomix 0.075 mg/cm²
Thimerosal 0.0080 mg/cm²

The herbicide propanil, which is an aniline-type chlorinated compound, has the
following structure:
Propanil has a number of different commercial
names. It is not very toxic, but it does cause the
skin disease chloracne, which can be quite
persistent and disfiguring. Propanil has this
effect because it is contaminated with 3,4,3',4’tetrachloroazoxybenzene. This compound is chloracnegic because of a peculiar
chemical configuration. in which two chlorine atoms on one aromatic ring are
connected either by another ring or by a double bond to two chlorines on another
ring, reminiscent of TCDD (dioxin), 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, which is
extremely toxic It has only recently been established that the chloroazobenzenes also
cause chloracne. Other herbicides-diaron, linuron, neburon-may also be
contaminated with tetrachloroazoxybenzene. Other chemicals that cause chloracne
are the chlorinated naphthalenes, biphenyls, dibenzodioxins, and dibenzofurans.
In a few documented cases patients have had active chloracne for up to 20 years
after they were exposed to one of these chemicals. In many instances chloracne
gradually improves over a number of years following cessation of exposure. Until
we made our investigation it had not been known that propanil caused chloracne.
Our findings were substantiated by measuring chlorinated azobenzene in the
propanil and by testing the chloracnegic effect of this material on the rabbit ear.

Thiuram mix 0.025 mg/cm²

6.11. Case Study: Carbamate and
Propanil Pesticide case and
Chloracne
(modified from Williams & Burson)
A plant in Arkansas manufactured several types of
pesticides in rotation, manufacturing and packaging
one pesticide for several weeks or months, and then
doing the same with another pesticide, and then
perhaps a third. The CDC became involved at this
plant because there had been several hospitalizations
of workers and also a number of complaints. OSHA
inspected the plant and requested that a health hazard
evaluation be done. Two physicians from the CDC
then surveyed the plant. On investigation, they found
that two types of compounds were produced.

REFERENCES

1. Fieldworkers' response to weathered residues of parathion. Spear, R.C. et al. J. Occup. Med. 19, 406-410 (1977).
2. Measurement of occupational exposure to pesticides. Bonsall, J.L. In Occupational Hazards of Pesticide Use, Turnbull,
G.J. (Editor), Taylor and Francis, London, 1985, pp. 13-33.
3. Regional variation in percutaneous penetration in man. Maibach, H.I., Feldmann, R.J., Milby, T.H., and Serat, W.F.
Arch. Environ. Health, 23, 208-211 (1971).
4. A study of the skin absorption of ethylbenzene in man. Dutkiewicz, T. and Tyras, H. Br. J. Indust. Med. 24, 330-332
(1967).
5. . The role of skin absorption as a route of exposure for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in drinking water.
Brown, H.S., Bishop, D.R. and Rowan, C.AAmer. J. Public Hlth. 74, 479-484 (1984).
6. Skin absorption of chemical contaminants from drinking water while bathing or swimming. Wester, R.C. and
Maibach, H.I. In New Concepts and Developments in Toxicology, Chambers, P.I., Gehring, P. and Sakai, F. (Editors), Elsevier
Science Publishers BV, 1986, pp. 169-174.
7. Photocontact allergy in humans. Epstein, J.H. In Dermato-toxicology, Second Edition, Marzulli, F.N. and Maibach, H.I.
(Editors), Hemisphere Publishing Corp., Washington, 1983, Ch. 18, pp. 391-404.
9. Methods for the study of irritation and toxicity of substances applied topically to the skin and mucous membranes.
Draize, J.H., Woodard, G. and Calvery, H.O. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therap. 82, 377-390 (1944).
10. . Scoring for eye irritation test. Chambers, W.A., Green, S., Gupta, K.C. et al Food Chem. Toxicol. 31, 111-115 (1993).
11. Guidelines for safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients in the EC countries. Loprieno, N. Food Chem. Toxicol. 30,
809-815 (1992).
12. A method for the objective assessment of eye irritation. Burton, A.B.G. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10, 209-217 (1972).
13. . The in vitro assessment of severe eye irritants. Burton, A.B.G., York, M. and Lawrence, R.S Food Cosmet. Toxicol.
19, 471-480 (1981).
14. The in vitro assessment of eye irritancy using isolated eyes. Price, J.B. and Purchase, I.J. Food Chem. Toxicol. 23, 313315 (1985).
15. Justification of the enucleated eye test with eyes of slaughterhouse animals as an alternative to the Draize test with
rabbits. Prinsen, M.K. and Koeter, H.B. W.M. Food Chem. Toxicol. 31, 69-76 (1993).
16. Benzene dermal penetration in rhesus monkeys. Maibach and Anjo. Arch. Environ. Health 36:256-260, 1981.
17. American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts and Figures-2002. Atlanta, Ga: American Cancer Society, 2002.

One compound was a carbamate, methomyl (N[(methylcarbamoyl)oxy] thioacetmidic acid methyl ester) which causes symptoms of
toxicity similar to those caused by organophosphorous compounds-namely, nausea
and vomiting, small contracted pupils, increased salivations, and muscle
fasciculation. Methomyl is a highly toxic carbamate.
In addition to the methomyl, the plant was making and packaging an herbicide
called propanil (3',4'-dichloropropionanilide), made from 3,4-dichlo-roaniline. A
number of employees had signs traceable to propanil: "acne," which was really
chloracne (see figure), and also a nonspecific rash and skin irritation. These skin
problems were more of a problem than the toxic effects of the methomyl. In trying
to evaluate the problems, we divided the workers into different groups. There were
some differences in symptoms, but because the chemicals were so pervasive, it was

6-19

18. Metallurgy: High nickel release from 1- and 2-euro coins. Nestle FO et al. Nature 419, 132 (2002).
19. The molecular determinants of sunburn cell formation. Murphy G et al. Exp Dermatol 2001; 10:155-60.
20. Relative toxicity of three corneal anesthetics measured in vitro with the cultured bovine lens. Hartwick, ATE; Sivak,
JG; Herbert, KL. Journal of Toxicology: Cutaneous and Ocular Toxicology. Vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 253-266. 1997.
21. Incidence of Basal Cell and Squamous Cell Carcinomas in a Population Younger Than 40 Years . Leslie J.
Christenson et al. JAMA. 294:681-690, 2005.

6-20

7.1. Anatomy.2
7.1.1. Blood-Brain Barrier .3
7.1.2. Electrophysiology .3
7.1.3. Myelin . 4
7.1.4. Oxygen Depletion .5
7.2. Classification of Neurotoxicants . 5
7.3. Sites of Attack . 6
7.4. Reversible/Irreversible Effects .7
7.5. Myelin and Myelinopathy .8
7.5.1. Solvent Myelinopathy .9
7.6. Hexacarbon-Induced Polyneuropathy-Axonopathy .9
7.7. Metals Neurotoxicity . 11
7.7.1. Lead . 11
7.7.1.1. Adults . 11
7.7.1.2. Children . 12
7.7.2. Methyl-mercury . 12
7.8. Perfluoro compounds . 13
7.9. Parkinson’s . 13
7.10. Acetylcholinesterase Inhibition. . 17
7.11. Consequences of Pesticide Exposures . 18
7.12. Chemical Warfare Agents . 18
7.13. Neurotoxicity Testing . 19
7.14. Case Study: Chlorinated Hydrocarbon Pesticide . 19

7-1

stimulate the cells to regrow, making it possible for severed
limbs to be surgically reattached to the body, and regain
function.

7.

In the brain and spinal cord, white matter corresponds to the
thick protective myelinating sheaths around nerves and nerve
bundles. The gray matter is made of cell bodies and
nonmyelinated or lightly myelinated fibers.
In higher vertebrates, the proportion of white to gray matter
increases as one ascends the phylogenetic tree until, in man,
more than 40 % of the cross-sectional area through the brain
consists of glistening myelin.

F7.1. Transverse section of a nerve. X700. The red tissue is a nerve
sheath. The dark circles are nerves wrapped with myelin, the smaller
light ones are unmyelinated nerves. Biological Structures.

7.1. Anatomy
The nervous system includes the brain, spinal cord, and the
peripheral sensory and motor nerves. The central nervous
system is the brain and spinal cord only.
Nerve cells normally grow when they are young, and stop
when they are mature. Injured central nervous system cells are
mostly unable to regenerate on their own (they do so to a very
limited degree; there are very few absolutes in biology). In the
peripheral nervous system cells, however, an injury can

F7.1a. Types of cells in the central nervous system.

There are various cell types in the brain, and the neurons have
been the star, primarily because of their spectacular action
potentials (F7.3). Neurons cohabit the brain with glia, which
outnumber neurons by a factor of 10. This has led to the
common misconception that humans “use 10 % of their brain”,
7-2

underlining the opinion that glial cells contribute nothing to
thinking. Specialized glial cells called astrocytes influence
connections between neurons, the level of chemical messengers
in the synapse, as well as the blood flow within the brain. They
collect nutrients from the bloodstream, and purify them for
neurons, protecting the brain from some toxic agents. When
this protection fails, for example for solvents which can easily
gain access to brain tissues, a variety of effects occur, some of
which are reversible (for example, alcohol intoxication).

The nervous system is a frequent target for a variety of
chemicals: metals, solvents, plastics, monomers,
agrochemicals…The protective mechanisms are limited, and
damage often poorly reversible. The reasons for the nervous
system’s vulnerability are itemized in T7.2.
7.1.1. Blood-Brain Barrier
The endothelial cells of the vessels in the central nervous
system are held together by tight junctions between cells,
preventing access of unwanted substances. The cells of the
barrier also have larger numbers of mitochondria and low
pinocytotic activity.
The barrier is successful in preventing the following toxicants
from entering: lead compounds, penicillin and staphylococcus
toxin. But lipid-soluble compounds such as methyl mercury,
pentachlorophenol, hexachlorophene, trimethyl tin and triethyl
tin can penetrate cell membranes, and make it through the
blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain barrier, like the Great
Wall in China, is not continuous, but has gaps in the
hypothalamus and the choroid plexa. In fetuses and very young
animals, the barrier is under construction.

In humans and in many animals, a long childhood implies an
adaptable neural structure that must be programmed through
experience primarily in childhood, but even later in life. The
processes needed for proper programming of such a complex
structure probably increase the vulnerability of the brain to
toxicants (lead is a good example).
T7.2. Physio-pathology of neuronal damage.
Vulnerabilities
Post-mitotic cells (little cell division)
Poor regeneration
Very vulnerable to oxygen depletion
Reasonable blood flow (toxicant access)
High lipid content (hydrophoic substances)
Unique shape and structure (long neurons)
Excitable membranes (receptors)
Low energy stores (glucose needed)
Axonal transport of nutrients (long distance)
Specific neurotransmitters (vulnerable)
Myelination
Protective mechanisms
Extra neurons (safety factor)
Local reorganizations (brain and peripheral plasticity)
Adaptive responses (re-programming)
Blood-brain barrier (denying access to toxicants)

There is a vulnerable portal through the nose and the olfactory
bulb that even allows small (0.1 µm) airborne particles into the
central nervous system. Contrary to the lungs, the particles are
not easily cleared from the CNS13.
Mannitol opens the blood-brain barrier.
7.1.2. Electrophysiology
The basic structure and polarization of a neuron are depicted in
F7.3. Anatomically, there is a cell body with dendrites, making
close contact with the terminal portions of adjacent neurons.
Communication between one neuron and another (across a
synaptic cleft of gap) is chemical in nature, requiring specific
neurotransmitters released from the terminal to a receptor.
7-3

With repolarization of the neuron in preparation for another
stimulus, the open pores (gates) close, the internalized sodium
is pumped out by specific enzymes (Na+ - K+ ATPase),
allowing an influx of potassium and accompanying chloride
ions.
All of this, under normal conditions takes no more than 10
milliseconds, but if the ability to repolarize is impaired (as with
the insecticides DDT and pyrethrins), one sees a slow
repolarization with a prolonged negative after potential
(F7.3C), a state in which the nerve is only partially repolarized
and is highly susceptible to rapid depolarization again.

Agonists substitute for naturally occurring neurotransmitter
substances and produce a response.
Antagonist substances bind to receptors without producing a
response.
Attachment of the
neurotransmitter to a
sensitive "patch"
(receptor) on the cell
body of the next neuron
results in depolarization
of the cell membrane and
the propagation of an
electrical impulse down
the axon of the neuron.

F7.4. The specificity of ion
channels is a size-matching and
electrostatic effect. Here, a
potassium ion (green) sits at the
center of a bacterial ion
channel (KcxA). The channel
lets in one sodium for each
1000 potassium ions, stripped
of its hydrating molecules.

With depolarization,
there is an opening of
pores in the cell
membrane, permitting
the influx of large
quantities of
sodium ions, with a
corresponding loss of
potassium ions to the
exterior of the neuron
(F7.3B) and a loss of
electrical potential from
a standing -80 mV to 0
mV (F7.3C).

7.1.3. Myelin
If you hit your finger with a hammer (you may try this at
home), you may notice that the feeling of pain will “reach you”
later than the hit detection. This is because these two signals
are not propagated by the same neuron size.
The depolarization-repolarization is relatively slow in nonmyelinated nerves, each small segment of neuronal membrane
having to undergo the event as the pulse propagates down the

F7.3. Polarization of neurons.

7-4

axon. To increase this velocity, a size increase proportional to
the square root of the diameter of the neuron is required. So, if
the rate of conduction is to be doubled, the nerve must be four
times larger in diameter. This would lead to very large nerves
when high speeds are needed.

areas of the brain (pictured here), leading to cerebral edema: a
staggering gait, coma and death.
F7.5. Oxygen depletion in
the brain (red regions).
Anoxia in the frontal lobe
causes impaired memory
and reasoning.
Plasma leakage in the corpus
callosum creates internal
pressure.
When the cerebellum is
affected, a staggering gait
results. Coma and death
result from further stress on
the brain stem.

A coating of myelin over axons reduces linear capacitance of
nerves by 1000 and increases resistance by 5000, substantially
increasing propagation speed (0.5 m/s in small nerves; 130 m/s
in myelinated fibers of 20 µm).
The conduction velocity in myelinated nerves increases
roughly in proportion to the diameter of the nerve e.g. a twofold increase in diameter means a two-fold increase in
conduction velocity.
Myelin reduces space requirements and makes nerves function
faster. How? Rather than each small segment of the neuron
undergoing depolarization-repolarization, this occurs only at
the small junctions (nodes of Ranvier) between the myelin
segments. Thus, the electrical impulse leaps down the axon
from node to node.
Once the electrical impulse has reached the terminus (bouton)
of the axon, the ionic changes stimulate the release of
neurotransmitters from storage vesicles to diffuse (by
exocytosis) out of the bouton membrane and across the
synaptic gap to bind to a receptor on the surface of the next cell
(neuron, muscle, etc.) to initiate a new electrical stimulus.

7.2. Classification of Neurotoxicants
Neurotoxicants are legion and come from all categories, as can
be seen from T7.6. Solvent neurotoxicity is commonly
reported in the literature.
Neurologists classify neurotoxicants according to their own
functional nomenclature, as follows.
Blocking agents: botulinum (bacterium) toxin prevents release
of acetylcholine, tetrodotoxin (puffer fish) blocks the sodium
channels.
Depolarizing agents: batrachotoxin (frog skin) destroys the
sodium gradient, DDT and pyrethrins (chrysanthenum flower)
increase sodium permeability.
Stimulants: strychnine (from tree seeds, rat poison) reduces
the effect of the inhibitor glycine, picrotoxin antagonizes the
inhibitor GABA, caffeine inhibits the breakdown of cAMP (a
second cell messenger).
Depressants: carbon tetrachloride, alcohol, barbiturates
(mechanisms less well known).

7.1.4. Oxygen Depletion
Although the brain accounts for only 2 % of body weight, it
consumes 15 % of the oxygen. When oxygen levels in the
blood become too low, neurotransmitter release in the frontal
lobe is affected, leading to impaired memory and reasoning.
Blood vessels in the brain allow plasma leakage into many

7-5

7.3. Sites of Attack

Receptor antagonists: atropine (nightshade plant)
competitively bind cholinergic receptors, propanolol binds
receptors of adrenalin and norepinephrine.
Anticholinesterase agents: organophosphate and carbamate
insecticides increase stimulation of cholinergic nerves by
impairing the destruction of acetylcholine in the synapse.
Neuro-muscular blockers: curare blocks acetylcholine action,
succynylcholine prevents membrane repolarization.

F7.3A points to the four vulnerable sites for neuronal damage
by chemicals.
1. the dendritic end of the neuron, these fine, filamentous
(hair-like) extensions having no protective myelination and
only a thin membrane,
2. the cell body of the neuron is usually exposed, with very
little protection other than the normal, thin, cell membrane,
3. the axon, either unmyelinated or myelinated, vulnerable
because of its length and the necessity of transporting
nutrients from the cell body to the bouton and the metabolic
products back to the cell body. Attack can occur at either
the axon or the myelin,
4. at the bouton itself, with an effect on the membrane or on
the neurotransmitters released.

T7.6. A list of common industrial neurotoxicants.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 35, No.8, p. 114, Feb. 26, 1986.
Acetyl ethyl tetramethyl
tetralin
Adiponitrile
Aniline
Aryl phosphates
Benzene
Cadmium
Carbon tetrachloride
Chloroprene

Acetyl pyridine

Acrylamide
Aluminium
Arsine
Barium
p-Bromophenyl acetylures
Carbon monoxide
Chlordecone
Cuprizone
Dichlorodiphenyl
trichloroethane [DDT]

Ethylene dichloride
Hydroquinone
Leptophos
Mercury
Methyl chloride
Nitrogen trichloride
Organotins (triethyltin)

Alkyl phosphates
Arsenic, inorganic
Azide
Boron
Carbon disulfide
Chlordane
Cobalt
2,4-Dichlorophenoxy acetic
acid [2,4-D]
Diisopropyl fluorophosphate
[DFP]
Hexachlorophene
Lead
Malonitrile
Methanol
Methyl n-butyl ketone
Organochlorine insecticides
Paraquat

Phenyl mercury

Phthalate esters

Selenium
Tetrachlorobiphenyl

Styrene
Thallium
Triorthocresylphosphate
[TOCP]
Zinc pyridinethione

Cyanide
Diethyl ether

Trichloroethylene
Zinc

With a more functional view, the types of attack could be as
follows:
1. on protein synthesis,
2. axonopathy, electrical impulse propagation along axons
and axonal transport of nutrients using the microtubular
system. Axon degeneration usually starts at the end of the
axon and grows proximally,
3. on neurotransmitter secretion, action and turnover,
4. myelinopathy, decay of myelin sheath. The classic natural
disease is multiple sclerosis, which results in pain, loss of
coordination and vision. Loss of myelin (death of the
Schwann cells) affects nerve conduction velocity. For
example, heavy use of organic solvents can lead to walking
problems. Also, the bacterium that causes leprosy directly
damages myelin sheating15.
Agents: Cyanate, lead, chronic cyanide, carbon monoxide.
Remember Resdan shampoo, featuring hexachlorophene?
Hexachlorophene is a good bacterio-static anti-biotic

Dimethyl sulphate
n-Hexane
Lead, tetraethyl
Manganese
Methyl bromide
Nickel [carbonyl]
Organophosphate esters
Phenol
Polybrominatad biphenyls
[PBBs]
Sulfur dioxide
Toluene
Vanadium, inorganic salt

7-6

Volatile organic solvents affect permeability of cell
membranes, so that membrane potentials are altered. CNS
depression and anesthetic effects result. Typical agents are
nitrous oxide, halothane, methoxyflurane, chloroform, ketones
and aldehydes, and solvents found in quick-drying glues.
However, repeated use of any of these may result in damage so
extensive that repair and regeneration mechanisms cannot
cope.
According to some sources, the average adult loses 85,000
brain cells per day, but only regenerates 50. There are about
100 billions cells in the adult brain. This limited regeneration is
an idiosyncrasy: adult canaries regenerate brain cells quite
readily24.
New brain cells are produced by exercise, estrogen, stimulating
environments, high social status, electroconvulsive therapy22,
stroke and other injuries and antidepressants. It appears that
cannabinoids promote neurogenesis, and produce anxiolytic
and antidepressant effects.16 This is very different from other
drugs of abuse, which suppress neurogenesis (nicotine, heroin,
cocaine).
Neurons involved in olfaction and memory are produced into
adulthood. Fewer cells are produced as a consequence of aging,
spikes in stress hormones, sleep deprivation, barren
environments and Ritalin.
Developing brains may be more susceptible to chemicals.
Common anesthetics administered to children (midazolam,
nitrous oxide and isoflurane) induce apoptosis in baby rat
models, which leads to lasting memory and learning deficits.
Exposed rats took longer to learn and tended to forget quickly,
probably because of observed cell deaths in the hippocampus.
In humans, delicate periods for brain development cover from
the third trimester of pregnancy to 2-3 years after birth11.
Anoxia can result from these agents, as well as excessive
stimulation with excitatory transmitters, leading to "organic

against Staphylococcus Aureus. Unfortunately, it also
produces myelinopathy. Fortunately, it does not penetrate
the skin well, and its toxicity was detected in burn victims.
5. Blood-brain barrier alterations (glue sniffing, microwaves)
6. Astrocyte alterations (brain’s cleaners disabled)
7. Peripheral nerve damage: acrylamide, arsenic, methanol.
Some culprits, such as n-Hexane, have been banned.
Polyneuropathy can involve more than one mechanism, in the
same way that more than one organ can be intoxicated by a
single agent. n-Hexane produces polyneuropathy.
F7.6a. At the anatomical level, neuropathy can be
peripheral or central. A graphic loss of central
neurons can be seen in Alzheimer’s disease
(bottom), where the temporal lobes formerly filled
with neurons providing memory and language are
now empty ventricles.
A normal brain is on top.

7.4. Reversible/Irreversible Effects
In mammals, a severed nerve in an arm or leg regrows and reestablished functional connections. A similar injury in the
spinal cord or within the brain will not be repaired, resulting in
permanent disability and paralysis. Poor regeneration in the
central nervous system has been attributed to proteins
embedded in brain myelin (the membranes that wrap each
nerve axon), which interact with an inhibitory receptor on
neurons called NgR.
Many acute exposures with low molecular weight compounds
produce reversible effects in nervous tissue.
7-7

correlation between Mn and IQ scores17. Fortunately,
Mn contamination of water at dangerous levels gives it
a nasty smell.
The difficulty of assessing clinically neurological disturbances
is illustrated by the Gulf War syndrome, where marginal
exposures to toxicants produced headaches, forgetfulness and
mood disorders. 60 % of these people show reduced blood flow
in the cortex. There is great conflict and discussion over the
existence of the syndrome.

brain syndrome or disease". Mixtures tend to be far more toxic,
due to inter-chemical potentiation.
For example, toluene potentiates the toxicity of all other
solvents, while methyl ethyl ketone potentiates the toxicity of
n-hexane and methyl n-butylketone.
In chronic exposures, myelinopathies, axonopathies or
destruction of cell populations (Parkinson’s) are more often
seen. These effects are irreversible…
Unborn children transplacentally exposed to methylmercury poisoning exhibit symptoms of cerebral palsy
at birth. Histology of the brain tissue after their death
shows absence of myelin and astrocytes (“infantile”
brains without normal maturation).
There is an inverse relation between a mother’s milk
level of PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) and the IQ
of children. When at least 1.25 µg/per gram of milk is
present, the IQ averages 6.2 points lower. Effects are
developmental delays, distractability, short-term
memory and planning skills impairment. PCBs were
used as insulation for transformers and now taint most
soils and water. These effects in the children are
permanent.
Utility workers used to wash their hands in PCBs,
secure in the knowledge that PCBs were “only
dangerous when burnt” (furanes are then generated).
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), used as a
flame retardant in foams, have a toxicity profile
resembling PCBs14 (birth defects, thyroid imbalance,
neurological damage).
Permanent damage is also produced by DDT and
manganese. Children drinking manganese-tainted water
at levels between 0.2 and 1 mg/l showed an inverse


7.5. Myelin and Myelinopathy
There are differences between myelination in the peripheral
(both sensory and motor) and central nervous systems. This is
important to understand the distinction between central and
peripheral myelinopathies induced by chemicals1.
The myelin8 sheath in peripheral nerves is from a specific cell,
the Schwann cell, which wraps itself around a portion of the
neuronal axon in much the same fashion as a window roller
blind. The nucleus of the Schwann cell resides on the outer
surface of the rolled myelin layers. A number of Schwan cells,
side by side, provide the myelin for one neuron.

F7.7. Myelin sheath anatomy in the peripheral and central nervous
systems. Human Physiology, Benjamin Cummings, 2002.

Two PBDEs have been phased out of production.

7-8

The junction between the edges of two Schwann cell myelin
projections form the nodes of Ranvier, the point of neuronal
depolarization, a thin "tunnel" into the membrane of the
neuron. Damage to a single Schwann cell can result in its
death, with a gap of nonmyelinated axon surrounded by debris.
The neuron conducts pulses rapidly down to the point of the
damage, but pulses slow down over the defect, resulting in the
disruption of smooth conduction.
In contrast, in the CNS, the role of the Schwann cell is carried
out by a specialized cell, the oligodendroglial cell which can
produce a plethora of sheaths around several adjacent axons,
rather than just on one axon. Destruction of one
oligodendroglial cell results in the changes in a group of
neuronal axons, and may result in more than one observed
adverse effect. Unlike peripheral myelinopathy which tends to
be relatively specific or localized in effect, a centrally located
myelinopathy may appear quite diffuse. Multiple sclerosis is
one such myelinopathy.

Among chronically exposed workers, the disease is common
but difficult to recognize because of highly variable, interindividual responses3. Individual diagnosis is difficult even
with the best test batteries, each victim presenting one or a few
symptoms2,3. Victims often present at a relatively young age
with serious neurological sequelae from excessive exposure to
solvents by inhalation, and are forced to retire from their work.
Most of the neuro-psychological symptoms appear to be
relatively minor, but still involve demyelination in the central
nervous system. The effects are fatigue, sleplessness,
headaches, irritability and nausea as well as memory and
concentration difficulties.
Problems occur with other organs, such as liver, kidneys, skin,
mucous membranes, heart, eyes and reproductive system.
The mechanisms by which solvents induce such effects is
unclear and many theories exist. However, many chemicals are
capable of nonspecific interactions with neurological
membrane phospholipids, causing instabilities and interference
with conduction, as well as causing damage to Schwann or
oligodendroglial cells and subsequent alterations in myelinated
pathways.

7.5.1. Solvent Myelinopathy
The short-term alcohol-like symptoms of solvent neurotoxicity
are headache, dizziness, sleepiness, agitation, euphoria and
confusion9.
The chronic symptoms are premature aging, memory
impairment, mild depression and anxiety.
The solvents are typically chlorinated hydrocarbons, alcohols,
esters and ketones. They are used for cleaning, degreasing,
thinning, stripping and finishing.
The least toxic are alcohols, esters and aliphatic hydrocarbons.
Aromatic hydrocarbons and most ketones are highly toxic, and
halogenated derivatives of hydrocarbons damage the CNS,
liver and kidneys. Benzene is both a neurotoxin and a
carcinogen.

7.6. Hexacarbon-Induced
Polyneuropathy-Axonopathy
n-hexane and methyl-butylketone cause classical peripheral
nervous system effects. They were at one time used in fastdrying glues in the shoe industry and responsible for outbreaks
in several countries such as Japan, Italy, Turkey and USA.
These two chemicals can be considered together since they
share a common toxic metabolite, 2,5-hexanedione7.
The associated pathology, first detected in humans, was taken
afterwards to animals models in rats and chickens. Scientists
7-9

returned to the human situation with recommendations for
modification of glue formulations, which produced fewer
neurotoxic metabolites.
The neuropathy, reported among workers in the shoe industry,
was always most severe in the early springtime, following a
winter of closed doors and windows (poor ventilation). The
signs and symptoms listed in T7.8 are matched
morphologically with Ranvier paranodal swelling at the distal
end of myelinated axons, with a progression of the swellings
toward the proximal portion of the nerve axon. These swellings
cause disruption of the microtubule and neurofilament system
responsible for the transport of nutrients to the distal part of the
axon from the cell body, with eventual death and disintegration
of the nerve endings. If recognized early enough, the syndrome
is reversible.

appearance of a bird nest. Nutrients are no longer transported
to the distal end.

F7.9. Partial metabolic pathway for n-Hexane
and methyl n-butyl ketone.

T7.8. Symptoms of hexacarbon neuropathy.

n-Hexane is transformed by two successive hydroxylations and
carbonylations (F7.9). The central-peripheral distal
axonopathy, so named by neurologists because it affects
distal axons of both the central and peripheral nervous systems,
is caused by a reactive metabolite, 2,5-hexanedione, found to
cyclize during further biotransformation to form a 5-membered
ring (imidazole) that interacts with protein structures to disrupt
neural organization and cause the tangles. The complete
mechanism has not been entirely identified, and interest has
declined with the banning of n-hexane and methyl-butylketone
and the substitution of other volatile ketones.

Weight loss
Gradual onset of distal paresthesia
Muscle weakness - distal (hands, feet)
No ataxia or muscle spasticity
Symmetrical dysfunction (hands, feet)
Loss of sensation - “stocking and glove”
Persistent muscular weakness
Atrophy of musculature
Experiments in animal models revealed that not only were the
distal parts of fine nerves of the peripheral nervous system
affected, but the distal portions of fine myelinated nerves in the
spinal cord (lumbar, sacral) were also damaged, showing much
the same morphology. In the paranodal swellings tangles of
microtubules and filaments were observed, giving the

7-10

This is seen in tunnel workers who inject an acrylamide resin
using a pressurized lance into soil and rock to create an
impervious, water-proof layer to prevent leaking.

F7.10. Formation
of axonopathies
and
myelinopathies.

7.7. Metals Neurotoxicity
The term "heavy metal" describes a class of agents in the
periodic table possessing certain chemical similarities,
including a divalent positive ion. Cadmium, cobalt, lead,
magnesium, manganese, mercury, nickel, and vanadium are
toxicologically important and all are neurotoxic.

Humans take a
long time to
bio-transform
and excrete a
single exposure
to these agents,
peak
elimination in
the urine
occurring
between 12 and
48 hr after
exposure. The
workers were
exposed daily to
high
concentrations (estimated as high as 2500 ppm, TLV = 50
ppm) throughout the winter months when ventilation in homes
and factories was poorest. When such workers were removed
from exposure, the condition was not alleviated, but continued
to worsen for approximately 14 days, after which recovery
began slowly. The condition was only partly reversible. 2,5hexanedione also attacks the gonads (testicular atrophy).

7.7.1. Lead
7.7.1.1. Adults

A millenium ago, body concentrations of lead were typically
one-hundredth to one-thousandth of post-industrial levels. The
average blood lead level today in the US is less than 2 µg/dl.
In the early 1970s, blood lead levels up to 40 µg/dL were
considered safe. Today, in adults, levels of 30 µg/dL are
tolerated. OSHA will permit a worker to return to work at 40
µg/dL, after being medically removed from work because of
lead poisoning.
Long-term exposure to low levels of lead may result in the
development of learning and behavior problems,
cardiovascular and kidney diseases, decreased fertility,
hypertension and cancer25. Blood lead levels ranging from as
little as 20 to 29 µg/dL are associated with a 39 % increase in
mortality from all causes, a 46 % increase in mortality from
cardiovascular diseases, and a 68 % increase in mortality due
to cancer.
Methyl-mercury is associated with the risk of myocardial
infarction, and this partially offsets the protective effects of
consuming fish26.
Overexposure to inorganic lead continues among workers in
battery manufacturing, mining of lead and zinc ores, and

Acrylamide (shown) and the catalyst DMAPN
(di-methyl-amino-propio-nitrile) cause the
“stocking-and-glove” central-distal axonopathy
by a somewhat similar mechanism.

7-11

painting and paper-hanging. In adults, acute lead exposure
leads to renal proximal tubular damage, while chronic exposure
can cause renal failure, hypertension, hyperuricemia, and
gout27. Work-related lead exposure remains a problem, and
prevention needs to be strengthened because of lead’s low dose
toxicity.

0.13 point loss. It is probable that any lead in the blood
decreases IQ.
2.2 % of children aged 1 to 5 are above 10 µg/dL, 10 % are
above 5 µg/dL and 90 % are above 1 µg/dL10. The best
predictor of lifelong IQ outcome is lead level in the blood at 2
years of age. So, be careful of “pica” !
Similar effects on cognitive developments in children have
recently been found in relation to Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons (from combustion of fossil fuels) 21.

7.7.1.2. Children

Lead is especially toxic to the central nervous system, affecting
mental development and intelligence in children. Behavioral
disorders such as attention deficit disorder have also been
attributed to lead exposure28. In children, 20 to 25 mg/100 ml
can cause irreversible brain damage29.
Studies of lead in city children initially drove the lowering of
acceptable lead concentrations in the blood to 10 µg/dl. But IQ
in children further increases as blood levels are lowered to 5
µg/dl6. Within the range 1-10 µg/dL, for each µg/dL increase in
blood lead level in children, there is a 0.82 point IQ deficit.
Above 10 µg/dL, each µg/dL increase only corresponds to a

For every 5 µg/dl increase in a child’s average blood-lead level
(ages 5 and 6), there is a 25 percent increase in the number of
violent activities associated with criminal arrests later in life23.
Lead acts by multiple mechanisms in the central nervous
system4. In neurodevelopmental toxicity, interference with cell
adhesion molecules causes a mis-wiring of the central nervous
system during early development, and permanent dysfunction.
This is a major concern for young children who absorb lead
much more efficiently than adults, and who may come into
contact with higher levels than adults.

Acute lead poisoning kills children
in the state of Zamfara, Nigeria
A total of 163 children out of 355 cases from several remote
villages have died of lead poisoning. The state of Zamfara
retained a Chinese company to mine gold in ground that
also had high concentrations of lead, but villagers attempted
to capitalise by illegally digging for the precious metal
themselves. The deaths were discovered during the country's
annual immunisation programme, when officials realised
there were virtually no children in several remote villages.
Villagers said the children had died of malaria, but blood
tests from local people showed high concentrations of lead,
pointing to death from lead encephalopathy. It is likely
locals became sick after lead removed during the process of
refining gold ore contaminated local water systems.

Another toxic mechanism involves interactions between lead
and other essential divalent cations (calcium and zinc), these
ions having vital roles in neurotransmission21.
Lead can also act on retinal tissue through apoptosis12. Early
prenatal exposure to lead causes kids to have retinal deficits up
to 10 years later.
7.7.2. Methyl-mercury
Mercury has no known metabolic function, and is the most
toxic non-radioactive heavy metal. It affects nerves, muscles
and all organs. In inorganic form, it is most injurious to the
kidneys, while its organic form in very neurotoxic.
7-12

Mercury promotes the production of free radicals, and may
bind selenium, which cannot then serve as a cofactor for
glutathione peroxidase. Mercury may inactivate the antioxidant
properties of glutathione, catalase, and superoxide dismutase.
Mercury intoxication has been also known as Minamata
disease, the name of a city in Japan where the offspring of
mothers who consumed fish poisoned by local industrial
discharges were victims of mental retardation and absence of
limbs.
Metallic mercury is poorly absorbed from the digestive
system, but mercury as a vapor (broken thermometer) can cross
the blood-brain barrier and accumulate in the central nervous
system as well as in kidneys, lungs and fatty tissues. It causes
dysfunction, acute and chronic inflammation and results in a
large variety of symptoms. Mercury-based dental fillings were
a bad idea; the problems of toxicity were pointed out as early
as 1840. Such fillings are unacceptable today, in view of
alternatives.
Inorganic mercury as calomel (mercurous chloride) was used
for centuries by physicians, until it was realized that it did
much more harm than good. Recently, it was possible to
purchase in Mexico a face cream named “Crema de Belleza”,
which had calomel is an ingredient. Urine levels found in users
and their partners were up to 20 µg/dl. Only 10 % of inorganic
mercury is absorbed by mouth, but it affects the digestive
system at all levels. The salts also damage the kidneys, leading
to reduced urine flow and possible need for dialysis. The
familiar antiseptic mercurochrome (a disodium salt of
dibromo-hydroxy mercuri-fluorescein) has caused death in
children when applied to large burns.
Organic mercury can be 90 % absorbed by the digestive
system (methyl mercury). Organic forms of mercury easily
travel through organic tissues and accumulate in brain, liver,

kidney, blood, skin, hair and breast milk. The body only
excretes 1 % of its organic mercury load every day, and
prognosis for this intoxication is very poor.
In the brain, methyl mercury inhibits acetylcholine synthesis,
resulting in fatigue, memory loss, mood changes, tremors,
pallor, weakness and loss of vision or taste. The symptoms are
very similar to those of multiple sclerosis.
This toxicologist, Karen E.
Wetterhahn of Dartmouth College,
used dimethyl mercury, protecting
herself with latex gloves. She spilled a
tiny amount on her gloves in August
1996, became ill within a few months,
bumping into doors and slurring words,
slipped into a coma and died less than a
year later. Dimethyl mercury penetrates
disposable latex gloves in 15 seconds
or less, is volatile and very lipid
soluble.
As a result of this incident, MSDS sheets were updated.

7.8. Perfluoro compounds
Some chemicals, such as perfluoro-octanesulfonic acid (PFOS)
and perfluoro-octanoinc acid (PFOA), used in non-stick fry
pans, have been shown to adversely affect behavior of mice19.
The probably carcinogenic compounds have also been shown
to act as estrogen mimics20.

7.9. Parkinson’s
The motor manifestations of Parkinson’s disease are related to
a lack of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain.

7-13

Within the brain, the pars compacta (F7.11) of the substantia
nigra (purple in F7.12) loses neurons which normally provide
dopamine signals to the striatum (blue). The striatum signals
control motion in the brain’s cortical regions.
The dark brown pigments at top left in F7.11correspond to
dopamine-producing neurons which oxidize dopamine to the
pigment neuromelanin. The normal brain at left shows more
dopamine both in the histology (dark brown cells) and in the
anatomical section (black pigment) than the Parkinson’s brain
at right
An effective therapy for the motor symptoms is the
administration of levodopa which can cross the blood-brain
barrier and act as a precursor of dopamine.
Although lesions in the dopaminergic system have been
prominent in Parkinson’s research, this brain disease is not
restricted to the substantia nigra. Other areas of the brain, the
spinal cord and the peripheral nervous system are affected in
Parkinson’s, as are serotonin, norepinephrine and acetylcholine
neurotransmission. Postmortem studies suggest that the brain
stem is first affected, then the substantia nigra-striatummidbrain, and finally the cerebral cortex.
One strange feature is that in the same individual, some
neurons are affected while others are spared, which underlines
our incomplete understanding of this disease. Early Parkinson’s
may manifest by a weakened sense of smell. Late Parkinson’s
results in non-dopaminergic difficulties, such as dementia.

F7.11. Histology of the pars compacta in the substantia nigra. Section of
the top of the brainstem (hole is the central canal) at the level of the
substantia nigra. Scientific American.

7-14

F7.12. Neuro-anatomy and PET scan of dopaminergic activity in
Parkinson’s disease.
American Scientist. Scan by Alain Dagher, McGill MNI.

7.13. Common symptoms of Parkinson’s. Scientific American.

7-15

F7.15. MPTP metabolism and action. Casaret & Doull.

F7.14. The frozen addicts. Scientific American.

Older people in Guam and in Guadeloupe are victims of a
disease very similar to Parkinson's. The disease has been
recently linked to eating sago palm (Guam) and soursop,
custard apple and pomme canelle (Guadeloupe).
The fruits contain alkaloids (alkaline-like, loose group of
compounds such as curare, atropine, physostigmine, morphine,
codeine, cocaine, caffeine, LSD, quinine, serotonin, strychnine,
nicotine). The disease does not respond to levodopa, contrary
to Parkinson's.
Prolonged administration of rotenone, a plant-derived pesticide
used in “organic” gardening produces symptoms of
Parkinson’s in rats5.

The exact causes of Parkinson’s disease are not known. There
are many indications that Parkinsons' s is related to toxic
exposure in the environment, an association long suspected by
epidemiologists.
The so-called frozen addicts posed for a picture in 1991
(F7.14) after having received treatment. Nine years earlier, all
suddenly became immobile as if they had instantly acquired
Parkinson’s. They had consumed a narcotic containing the
impurity MTPT (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine) which inhibits mitochondria's electron
transport chain. This episode provided a model for the disease.
MPTP causes a condition similar to Parkinson’s in animals and
its molecular structure is related to that of several pesticides
(F7.15).

As in many neurological diseases, it is difficult for clinicians to
determine if a drug therapy actually slows (or reverses) the
death of brain cells, or just improves brain function, so that it
compensates for the loss of cells. Until this distinction can be

7-16

made, the various attempts to deal with the disease by
preventing the death of neurons may not be productive.

7.10. Acetylcholinesterase Inhibition.
There are 2 types of cholinergic receptors: muscarinic (heart
rate, bronchoconstriction, arteriole dilatation, secretions of
stomach and intestine, salivary and lacrimal glands) and
nicotinic (neuro-muscular junction, autonomic ganglia).
Acetylcholine will stimulate both of them, but muscarine and
nicotine are selective.
The sites of action may be anywhere in the body, but the
mechanism is very specific, as depicted in F7.17. Toxicants can
have effects on muscarinic and nicotinic receptors and on
acetyl-cholinesterase itself (the enzyme responsible for
degradation of acetylcholine in the synapse).

F7.17. Nerve synapse. Toxicants can interfere with neurotransmitter
release, stimulation of receptors or the breakdown of acetylcholine by
acetycholinesterase.

Organophosphates and carbamate insecticides inhibit
acetylcholinesterase, producing over-stimulation of the
cholinergic systems.

F7.16. Therapeutic thinking for prevention of cell loss in Parkinson’s
disease (and many chronic ailments). The mechanisms for cell killing
are in red, interventions to prevent cell loss are in blue-gray.

7-17

For example, organophosphates react with a serine hydroxyl
group at the active site of acetylcholinesterase, inactivating the
hydrolytic function. This causes an accumulation of
acetylcholine esters, leading to cholinergic over-stimulation.
In acute or moderate chronic exposures, neuromuscular
weakness occurs because of down-regulation of receptor
activity. The diaphragm is a red muscle dependent on
acetylcholinesterase, therefore breathing can be affected.
California has a long-standing formal blood cholinesterase
monitoring program for mixers, loaders, and applicators of
pesticides. The test looks at two substances,
acetylcholinesterase (nerves and red blood cells) and
pseudocholinesterase (liver). Normal pseudocholinesterase
values range between 8 and 18 units per milliliter.

It was shown that children are born with detectable
concentrations of many pesticides in their blood and are
exposed further through breast milk.
Many studies30,31,32 have confirmed that children exposed to
high pesticide levels in the womb have lower average IQs than
other kids. The most heavily exposed children scored an
average of 7 points lower on IQ tests compared with children
with the lowest pesticide exposures. Since pesticide exposure
after birth wasn’t linked to lower intelligence scores, this
suggests that the harm caused by the chemicals is greatest
during early pregnancy, when the brain is developing. Earlier
studies have linked organophosphate pesticides with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

Intoxication is treatable with atropine, which competitively
binds the receptors of cholinergic
nerves. Atropine (shown), otherwise
known as Atropina Belladoña has an
interesting story. Women in times past
would administer themselves atropine
to dilate their pupils before going to court or meeting
prospective important lovers. If you are in court, how others
perceive you may be your best weapon, so-to-speak putting
"your best eyes forward".

F7.18. Mexican children
from "Foothills" (Yaqui
Indians) have only one
major exposure to
pesticides: DDT spraying
by the government to
control malaria. "Valley"
farmers apply pesticides
45 times per crop year
and also tend to use
household bug sprays
daily. These exposures are
not significantly different
from those in other
intensely farmed areas.

7.11. Consequences of Pesticide
Exposures

7.12. Chemical Warfare Agents

Neurobehavioral testing of exposed children in Mexico by the
University of Arizona showed that exposed children had:
less stamina,
poorer gross and fine eye-hand coordination,
weaker 30-minute recall and
impaired drawing ability (F7.18).

The military are trained to inject themselves with atropine in
case of a neurotoxic attack.
Organophosphorus warfare agents as well as insecticides can
also be countered by certain drugs such as galantamine, a
reversible centrally-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor.
7-18

Galantamine, otherwise used in Alzheimer’s treatment, was
effective up to 3 hours before and 5 minutes after exposure to
the organophosphate18.

Agent

Tabun

Sarin

VX

T7.19. Warfare Neurotoxicants.
LD50
Appearance &
Absorption
(mg/m3.min
odor
or mg/kg)

Colorless to
amber-brown
liquid; slightly
fruity odor
Colorless liquid;
no odor when
pure
Colorless to
amber liquid; no
odor when pure

400, inhaled
1000, skin
Skin
contact and
inhalation

70, inhaled
1700, skin

50, inhaled
10, skin

Rats are tested for abnormal posture, closure of eyelids,
tremors or convulsions, lacrimation, salivation, gait, mobility,
level of arousal, stimulus response, pupil response, righting
reflex, forelimb and hindlimb grip strength and foot splay.
Although cells are used to test for neurotoxicity, these models
have not made great inroads yet.

Symptoms

Runny nose,
constricted
pupils,
tightness in
chest, blurred
vision, nausea,
vomiting,
confusion, loss
of control of
body functions,
respiratory
paralysis.

F7.20. A device to measure
hand tremor.

7.14. Case Study: Chlorinated
Hydrocarbon Pesticide
(modified from Williams & Burson)

7.13. Neurotoxicity Testing

A physician in Virginia saw a patient who worked in a plant where Kepone
(chlordecone) was produced. The patient complained of weakness, nervousness,
weight loss, shakiness and difficulty in reading and driving because he could not
focus his eyes. The physician thought that the exposure to Kepone might have
caused the patient's illness and sent a blood sample to the CDC for a determination
of Kepone content. The full chemical name of Kepone is 1,1a,3,3a,4,4a,5b,6decachlorooctahydro-l,3,4-metheno-2 H-cyclobuta [cd] pentalen-2-one.
The CDC used to have a service for physicians in which, on request, would analyze
adipose tissues, blood samples, and other biologic samples for content of chlorinated
hydrocarbon pesticides. The chemist at CDC who received the sample, not realizing
the emergency, thought that the Virginia physician had previously arranged for such
an analysis. He therefore accepted the sample, analyzed it, and found very high
Kepone levels. He thought his analysis was wrong, so he repeated it three times
before he said anything about it to anyone. In the meantime, the patient visited a
neurologist at the Medical College of Virginia. The patient's symptoms and signs
now included extreme nervousness, tremor, ataxia, skin rash, and an odd rolling of
the eyes called opsoclonus. He also had lost weight. He couldn't concentrate even to
read a newspaper, and he still had trouble driving.

Neurotoxicity testing is complicated by the need to
differentiate between CNS and peripheral nerve damage, as
well as between reversible and permanent lesions.
Tests in humans can range from sensory-motor (F7.20) to
psychological. Batteries of tests give more perspective on
neuromorbidity: X-rays, CAT scans, MRI, electromyography,
EEG, peripheral nerve conduction velocity and cerebrospinal
fluid composition are used. There is some discussion about the
definition of the “normal” range appropriate for various results,
which is often defined purely by statistics, as opposed to
specific thresholds.
In animals models, performance tests such as maze, movement
recording and platforms hidden within pools are frequent.
7-19

Ultimately, the high Kepone blood level determined at CDC was reported to the
neurologist at the medical college and also to the requesting physician.
The toxic effects of Kepone observed in animals include excitability, tremor, weight
loss, and, in some cases, testicular atrophy. Kepone is a persistent compound. Once
absorbed, Kepone will be stored in body tissues for a significant period of time. It is
the only representative of the group of persistent halogenated pesticides that is not
predominantly stored in adipose tissue. The ratio between blood and adipose tissue
is not as large as for other chlorinated aromatic pesticides and industrial chemicals,
and a great deal of Kepone is stored in the liver, because of its greater polarity.
After this case was uncovered, we needed some facts about the plant in which the
man worked. Several phone calls were made in an attempt to gather information.
The neurologist was asked to question the patient about other employees to
determine if a larger problem existed. The patient reported that employees at the
plant were unable to even drink much coffee during their breaks because they shook
so severely they would spill the coffee, or would be unable to fill their cups, an
indication that all probably had Kepone-caused tremor.
This was reported to the Virginia state health department; it became apparent that
somebody needed to take direct action. The state epidemiologist inspected the plant
and closed it, all within two days.
It was a small facility operating out of an old garage. In making Kepone, the firm
used a completely open drying operation. During the drying process, dust was
spread everywhere. There were no facilities in which the employees could change
clothes or wash, and no separate eating facilities.
It was difficult to understand how people could be affected so profoundly-some
people were unable to stand up from a chair-and still continue to work without
realizing they were being affected by the chemical. In addition to the rash and
nervousness noticed in the index case, many people complained of chest pains, but it
was not possible to determine a cause for that complaint. It probably was a
neurologic effect.
A divorced worker at the plant even seemed to have Kepone-related problems with
alimony pay. He would begin to feel sick after working with Kepone, would stay
home with no pay. His ex-wife, thinking this an intentional avoidance of work, went
to court, and the man would find himself in jail for failure to support her. While in
jail, he would recover; and then he would resume work at the Kepone plant, become
sick again, and the whole cycle would repeat. Other workers felt that perhaps they
were being affected by Kepone, yet they had been told, "This compound doesn't
really do anything. It's probably because you drink too much alcohol."
In addition to the workers, residents in the neighborhood were also examined, as
well as employees' family members. Sometimes it is difficult to conduct these types
of examinations and evaluations objectively because of publicity about the problem.
As mentioned, the workers were unable to change clothes at the plant. Workers
often carry dust of the chemicals they are working with -particularly persistent
compounds, including chlorinated hydrocarbons, lead, and asbestos- home on their
clothes and in their cars, thus exposing their families. Many family members of the
employees had Kepone blood levels. They were lower than those of the plant
employees, but they were higher than what might be expected in the general

population. The Kepone produced at this plant was manufactured for export to other
countries. Kepone is not registered for use in the United States, so normally Kepone
blood levels are not observed in the general U.S. population.
The plant was closed and never reopened. Many political problems remained after
the closure, however. The James River was found to be contaminated with Kepone
and was closed to fishing for a while. The state of Virginia is still struggling with the
problems resulting from this episode of contamination.

REFERENCES

1. Pesticides and Neurological Diseases (2 nd Edition), Ecobichon D.J., Joy R. M. CRC Press, 1994. WA240 E19p 1994.
2. Neuropsychological performance and solvent exposure among car body repair shop workers. Daniell, W. et al. Br. J.
Indust. Med. 50, 308-377 (1993).
3. Monitoring neurotoxins in industry: development of a neurobehavioral test battery. Baker, E.L. et al. J. Occup. Med.
25, 125-130 (1983).
4. Mechanisms of lead neurotoxicity, or looking beyond the lamppost. Silbergeld, E.K. FASEB J. 6, 3201-3206 (1992).
5. Chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of Parkinson's disease. Betarbet R. Sherer TB. MacKenzie G.
Garcia-Osuna M. Panov AV. Greenamyre JT. Nature Neuroscience. 3(12):1301-6, 2000 Dec.
6. Cognitive Deficits Associated with Blood Lead Concentrations <10 µg/dL in US Children and Adolescents. Lanphear
BP., Kim Dietrich, Peggy Auinger, and Christopher Cox. Public Health Rep 2000 115: 521-529.
7. Role of metabolism in hexacarbon neuropathy. Divincenzo, G.D. et al. In The Scientific Basis of Toxicity Assessment,
Witschi, H. (Editor), Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press, Netherlands, 1980, pp. 183-200.
8. Myelin. Morell, P. and Norton, W.T. Sci. Amer. 242 (May), pp. 88-118 (1980).
9. Major neurological disease and occupational exposure to organic solvents. Seaton, A. et al. Quart. J. Med. New Series
84, 707-712 (1992).
10. Intellectual Impairment in Children with Blood Lead Concentrations below 10 µg per Deciliter. Canfield RL et al.
New England Journal of Medicine April 17th 2003.
11. Early Exposure to Common Anesthetic Agents Causes Widespread Neurodegeneration in the Developing Rat Brain
and Persistent Learning Deficits. Jevtovic-Todorovic V et al. J. Neurosci., Feb 2003; 23: 876 - 882.
12. Bcl-xL overexpression blocks bax-mediated mitochondrial contact site formation and apoptosis in rod
photoreceptors of lead-exposed mice. He L et al. Proc Nat Acad Sci 100:1022-7, Feb 4th, 2003.
13. In press. Translocation of inhaled ultrafine particles to the brain. Oberdörster, G., et al. Inhalation Toxicology.2004.
14. Persistent pollutants in land-applied sludges. Hale, R.C., . and W.H. Duff. Nature 412(July 12):140-141. 2001.
15. Contact-dependent demyelination by Mycobacterium leprae in the absence of immmune cells.Rambukkana, A., et al.
Science 296(May 3):927-931. 2002.
16. Cannabinoids promote embryonic and adult hippocampus neurogenesis and produce anxiolytic- and
antidepressant-like effects. Jian W et al. J Clin Invest, Oct 13 2005. doi:10.1172/JCI25509
17. Water manganese exposure and children's intellectual function in Araihazar, Bangladesh. Wasserman, G.A., et al.
Environmental Health Perspectives 114 (January):124-129.
http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/docs/2005/8030/abstract.html. 2006.
18. Effective countermeasure against poisoning by organophosphorus insecticides and nerve agents. Albuquerque EX et
al. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 103, no. 35, 13220-13225, August 29, 2006.
19. Neonatal exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) cause deranged
behaviour and increased susceptibility of the cholinergic system in adult mice. Johansson NA et al. Society of Toxicology
Meeting, San Diego,March 6-9 2006.
20. Estrogenicity of perfluoroalkyl acids in rainbow trout: Results from a screen of 36 structurally diverse
perfluorinated chemicals (Abstract 290). Benninghoff, AD et al. Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 27th
Annual Meeting in North America. Montréal, Nov 5-9, 2006.
21. Effects of prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on neurodevelopment in the first three
years of life among inner-city children. Perera FP et al. Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume 114, Number 8, August
2006.
22. Electroconvulsive seizures regulate gene expression of distinct neurotrophic signaling pathways. Altar CA et al. The
Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 24, No. 11 , pp. 2667-2677, 17 March 2004.
23. Age of Greatest Susceptibility to Childhood Lead Exposure: A New Statistical Approach. Richard W. Hornung, Bruce
P. Lanphear, and Kim N. Dietrich. 2009. Environmental Health Perspectives doi:10.1289/ehp.0800426 available via
http://dx.doi.org/
24. Neuronal production, migration, and differentiation in a vocal control nucleus of the adult female canary
brain.Goldman S.A, Nottebohm F. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 1983;80:2390–2394. doi:10.1073/pnas.80.8.2390
25. Blood lead levels and mortality. Lustberg Mark, Silbergeld Ellen. Arch Intern Med 2002, 162:2443-2449.
26. Mercury and Health. Bolger PM, Schwetz BA. New England J Med 2002, 347:22, 1735-1736.
27. Lead and the kidney: Nephropathy, hypertension and gout. Perazella M. Conn Med 1996, 60:521-526.
28. Neurobehavioral aspects of lead neurotoxicity in children. Winneke G, Kramer U. Cent Eur J Public Health 1997, 5:6569.

7-20

29. Exposure of children to heavy metals from smelters: Epidemiology and toxic consequences. Landrigan P, Baker E.
Environ Res 1981:25:204-224.
30. Prenatal Exposure to Organophosphates, Paraoxonase 1, and Cognitive Development in Childhood. Stephanie M.
Engel, James Wetmur, Jia Chen, Chenbo Zhu, Dana Boyd Barr, Richard L. Canfield, Mary S. Wolff. Environ Health Perspect.
2011 August; 119(8): 1182–1188. Published online 2011 April 21. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1003183
31. Seven-Year Neurodevelopmental Scores and Prenatal Exposure to Chlorpyrifos, a Common Agricultural Pesticide.
Virginia Rauh, Srikesh Arunajadai, Megan Horton, Frederica Perera, Lori Hoepner, Dana B. Barr, Robin Whyatt. Environ
Health Perspect. 2011 August; 119(8): 1196–1201. Published online 2011 April 21. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1003160
32. Prenatal Exposure to Organophosphate Pesticides and IQ in 7-Year-Old Children. Maryse F. Bouchard, Jonathan
Chevrier, Kim G. Harley, Katherine Kogut, Michelle Vedar, Norma Calderon, Celina Trujillo, Caroline Johnson, Asa
Bradman, Dana Boyd Barr, Brenda Eskenazi. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 August; 119(8): 1189–1195. Published online
2011 April 21. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1003185

7-21

8.1. Roles of the Liver . 2
8.2. Anatomy.3
8.2.1. First-Pass . 3
8.3. Physiology. 5
8.3.1. Entero-Hepatic Loop.5
8.3.2. Liver Enzyme Distribution . 5
8.3.3. Levels of Cytochrome P450 . 6
8.4. Pathology . 8
8.4.1. Anatomical Classification of Liver Injury .9
8.4.2. Cytological Classification of Liver Injury .9
8.4.3. Pathological Classification of Liver Injury .9
8.4.4. Substances promoting Detoxification .9
8.5. Action of Toxicants in the Liver . 10
8.5.1. Enzymatic Activation of Toxicity . 10
8.5.1.1. Parathion . 10
8.5.1.2. Bromobenzene . 11
8.5.1.1. Acetaminophen . 11
8.5.1.2. Halogenated Alkanes/Alkenes . 13
8.5.2. Natural Hepatotoxicants . 16
8.5.3. Persistence of Hepatotoxicity . 16
8.6. Tests of Liver Function . 16
8.7. In Vitro Liver Experimentation . 17
8.8. Temporary Liver Support . 18
8.9. Case Study: Acute Dimethyl Nitrosamine Poisoning . 19

8-1

8.

8.1. Roles of the Liver
The largest gland, the liver performs over 500 known
functions.
1) Metabolism of foods (fats, carbohydrates, amino acids and
proteins) and most amino acid interconversions and
catabolism, bile secretion to enhance the uptake of dietary
lipids and vitamins, urea formation (excretion of nitrogen),
storing vitamins A and D.
2) It stabilizes the glucose level by taking up and storing
glucose as glycogen, breaking it down back to glucose
when needed, as well as forming glucose from noncarbohydrate sources such as amino acids. Hypoglycemia
occurs only late in the course of severe liver disease,
because the liver has a large functional reserve, maintaining
its function with only 20% of the
liver functioning.
3) Synthesis of proteins: secretion of
plasma albumin (a carrier for
drugs and hydrophobic
compounds such as unconjugated
bilirubin, shown), most of the
globulins (coagulation Factors II,
V, VII, VIII, IX, X) other than gamma globulins. Most
cholesterol synthesis takes place in the liver.
4) Detoxification (turning fat-soluble poisons into watersoluble wastes that can be eliminated through the kidneys)
and excretory bile formation, the major product of
cholesterol catabolism.
5) It removes red blood cells and warms the blood.

F8.1. Liver anatomy.

The Roman anatomist Galen (200 AD) made the liver the
principal organ of the human body, arguing in his text “On the
Usefulness of the Parts of the Body” that it emerged first in the
formation of a fetus.
Up to 25% of the hepatocytes are binucleate and another 50%
are polyploid, reflecting a need for redundancy in this vital
organ. The liver is a site where apoptosis occurs normally,
sometimes obviously associated with toxic exposure.
After acute toxic exposure one finds: lipid accumulation in
hepatocytes, necrosis or hepatobiliary dysfunction. After
chronic exposures, one sees cirrhotic-like or neoplastic
changes. Some forms of liver injury are reversible, while others
are not.



In rodents, but not in humans, the sedative phenobarbital inihibits
apoptosis, leading to considerable liver enlargement.

8-2

For example, hemoglobin transformed to bilirubin is
conjugated with glucoronic acid (both shown) in the liver, and
the xenobiotics Hg and Pb are excreted in the bile…
Glucoronic acid also conjugates excess estrogens, the resulting
products exiting unchanged through the kidneys. Cats are
vulnerable to many toxicants because of their limited ability to
form glucuronide conjugates.

8.2. Anatomy
The liver is the source of the veins and the principal instrument
of sanguification, Galen observed. He was not far off the mark,
given the organ's position in the circulatory system (F8.2) and
its role in intermediary metabolism and biotransformation of
xenobiotics.
Note the blue portal vein in the center of the diagram, and how
blood flows from the various components of the digestive
system into the portal vein. Blood output is into the vena cava.
Some 70% of the liver’s blood supply is venous, coming from
the mesenteric plexus via the portal vein, while 30% is arterial,
from the hepatic artery.

F8.2. Liver’s position in the circulation. Dorling Kindersley, 1998.

8.2.1. First-Pass
The First Pass effect refers to the influx of toxicants through
the portal vein (F8.2), particularly from the digestive system
and to the high level of bio-transformation in the liver.

F8.3. Section of a hepatic lobule. Lobules are 1-2 mm in diameter,
visible to the naked eye. Fox, 2004.

8-3

On entering the liver, the blood vessels break up into a dense
capillary bed, the blood pressure decreases sharply and there is
slow perfusion of the blood through the sinusoids, permitting

the bordering cells to extract chemicals from the bloodstream
by passive diffusion (F8.3). The functional unit of the liver, the
hepatic lobule, is a radial array centered on the central vein.
Branches of three conduits converge towards the center: portal
vein, hepatic artery and bile duct. Blood flows through
sinusoids, while canaliculi channel bile. The blood of sinusoids
flows towards the center, the bile in the canaliculi away from
the center, towards a branch of the bile duct.
The sinusoidal lining is fenestrated, allowing chemicals easy
access to the hepatocytes, which make up the bulk of the organ.
There are at least 6 different types of liver cells: Hepatocyte,
Biliairy Epithelial, Endothelial, Kupffer, Ito and Pit.
Endothelial cells differ from the vascular endothelium
elsewhere in the body in that they lack a basement membrane
and contain numerous fenestrae that permit hepatocytes to have
ready access to nutrients and macromolecules in plasma.
Endothelial cells are also responsible for endocytosis of
molecules and particles, and play a role in lipoprotein
metabolism.
Spindle-shaped Kupffer's cells are tissue macrophages. They
form an important part of the body's reticuloendothelial system.
Their major functions include phagocytosis of foreign particles,
removal of endotoxins and other noxious substances, and
modulation of the immune response through the release of
mediators and cytotoxic agents.
Peri-sinusoidal fat-storing cells (Ito cells) store vitamin A.
They transform into fibroblasts in response to hepatic injury,
contributing to hepatic fibrosis.

F8.4. Section of lobules in the pig, x 100.
At this magnification, individual cells are barely discernible.
Biological structures.



Fibroblasts secrete collagen fibers and provide mechanical tension to
close wounds.

8-4

Pit cells, the least common sinusoidal lining cells, are large,
granular lymphocytes, which function as natural killer cells.
The extracellular matrix of the liver includes its reticulin
framework and several molecular forms of collagen, laminin,
fibronectin and other extracellular glycoproteins.

Phenolphtalein (the active ingredient in Ex-Lax) is an effective
laxative because of its persistence through the entero-hepatic
loop. After Phase II metabolism in the liver and excretion in
the bile, intestinal flora releases it in native form, allowing reabsorption.
Hg is excreted in the bile. If in the form of methyl mercury, it
is reabsorbed from the biliary tract, contributing to its long
half-life.

The blood in the liver has a low oxygen content, probably to
reduce oxidation reactions. The histologic appearance of the
liver is shown in F8.4.

However, the increased exposure to toxicants due to the enterohepatic loop may be a side-show. Up to 95% of bile is
reabsorbed through the entero-hepatic loop, and bile plays a
large role in the regenerative ability of the liver. This
regeneration is tied to the stimulation by the bile of the FXR
gene and protein, which acts as a bile sensor.
Rats fed bile components in their chow have livers 30% larger
within a week. The entero-hepatic loop may support a natural
cycle that enhances regeneration in the liver7. It is the only
internal human organ known to naturally regenerate, from just
25% of its tissue.

8.3. Physiology
8.3.1. Entero-Hepatic Loop

8.3.2. Liver Enzyme Distribution
The level of enzymes (F8.6) is not constant throughout the
lobule. There is a gradation of activity from portal input to vein
output.
Phase I activities increase 5-fold from the portal input to the
central vein output.
Phase II conjugating enzymes levels (such as glutathione
transferase and glucuronyltransferase) decrease approximately
4-fold from the portal input to the central vein output.

F8.5. Entero-Hepatic loop.

Compounds that are metabolized (or not) and excreted into the
bile duct may be re-absorbed from the small intestine before
excretion, resulting in increased toxic exposure.

What does this organization signify when considering toxic
reactions in the liver, specifically in avoiding irreversible
damage to hepatocytes?
8-5

It is probably more efficient for liver cells to specialize in a
specific aspect of bio-synthesis, thereby creating two cell
populations (Phase I and Phase II).
Since Phase I reactive intermediates are particularly toxic, it is
also probably better to provide less enzyme at the portal input,
where the highest toxicant concentration is expected. This
spreads out Phase I biotransformation and toxic stress more
uniformly over the lobule.
Phase II enzymes, less likely to increase toxic stress, may be
spread according to the increased availability of bio-synthetic

Phase II activity is cast back to a lower basal rate, Phase II
being the rate-limiting step in many detoxifications.
These patterns of enzyme expression are not inflexible across
species or across time. In male rats, hepatic enzyme
distributions alter during aging. Peroxisomes (Phase I) are
more active in pericentral than periportal hepatocytes, in
contrast to the uniform pattern in young animals. Other ageestablished lobular gradients were observed in trifunctional
enzyme (central > portal) and catalase  (portal > central,
molecule shown below). Enzyme levels are significantly
altered in aged animals, perhaps
contributing to disturbances in
lipid metabolism.
A chemical toxic to the liver may
be more toxic when ingested or
injected intra-peritoneally than
when absorbed through lungs or
skin, because disposition of the
toxicant to other body
compartments will lower the effective concentration to the
liver.
8.3.3. Levels of Cytochrome P450
P450s are heme-containing monooxygenases and are divided
into two primary groups: steroidogenic and xenobiotic.
Steroidogenic P450s are found both in prokaryotes and in the
mitochondria and smooth endoplasmic reticulum of
eukaryotes. They synthesize steroids and other substances

F8.6. Distribution of NADH-oxido-reductase (Phase I, top) and ATPase (bottom) in lobules. X 50. Biological Structures.

machinery upstream, where Phase I metabolism requirements
are less. In a high-level insult, there will be a buildup of
reactive intermediates in the central vein region where Phase I
metabolism is highest. Once enzyme reserves are depleted,



Genetic induction of supplementary catalase in mitochondria has been

shown to increase the life-span of rats by 15%.

8-6

necessary for the maintenance of cell wall integrity and cellular
differentiation.

cytoplasm of the cell as soluble enzymes. These changes are
easily visible under the microscope (F8.7).
If the cell copes successfully with this defensive mechanism,
the levels of these enzymes will slowly decline back to normal.
If it does not, the levels of Phase I and II enzymes will remain

Xenobiotic P450s are found in the smooth endoplasmic
reticulum of eukaryotes and metabolize foreign biological
substances. There are about 12,000 members across all forms
of life, the human ones being encoded by 57 human genes.
This group of P450s appears to have evolved from the
steroidogenic P450s during the era of plant-animal
differentiation, conveying a survival advantage by allowing
animals to detoxify the substances that they consumed.
These P450s are responsible for most oxidative drug
metabolism: CYP3A (~50%) and CYP2D61 (~30%) and
CYP1A2, 2C9/10, 2C19, and 2E1 which account for
approximately equal percentages of the remaining 20%.
Relevant P450s have been established for only ~ 20% of
marketed medications.
If hepatocytes encounter a moderate or high level of biotransformable chemicals (say carbon tetrachloride), the cells
induce synthesis of additional Phase I and Phase II enzymes.
The synthesis is not selective for individual enzymes, rather, a
broad spectrum of enzymatic activities are turned on, with the
capability of biotransforming a vast array of exogenous
chemicals. This is compatible with adaptation to natural toxins
which usually come as a group of related compounds, rather
than as a single purified molecule.
This involves the synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA) which
is used by the cellular rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) to
synthesize proteins (Phase I and II enzymes) which are either
incorporated into a subcellular membranous organelle - the
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) or released into the

F8.7. Appearance of rat liver cells at x 100 in the normal state (left) and
after 16 hours of intoxication by ketamine-xylazine (right). Héroux, 1993.

elevated and cytotoxicity may result from the accumulating
reactive intermediates. A wide range of compounds are able to
induce increased levels of cytochrome P450 enzymes.
Drugs: Aminopyrine, Amphetamine, Barbiturates, Chloral
hydrate, Chlordiazepoxide (Librium),Chlorpromazine,
Diazepam (Valium), Diphenhydramine, Ethanol, Ethanol
pyridione, Glutethimide, Halothane, Hypericin and Hyperforin
(St. John’s wort), Imipramine, Meprobamate, Morphine,
Nicotine, Phenylbutazone, Phenytoin, Promazine,
Propoxyphene (Darvon), Steroids,
Sulfanilamide, Thalidomide, Trimethadione, Urethane,
Zoxazolamine.

1

CYP2D6 has more than 75 known genetic variants, resulting in poor, intermediate, extensive
or ultra-rapid activity.

8-7

Industrial chemicals: Alcohols, Aldrin/dieldrin, Chlordane,
Chloroform, DDT, DDD, DMSO, Heptachlor, Ketones,
Lindane, PCB compounds, Piperonyl butoxide, Pyrethrum,
Toxaphene.
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons: Benzo(a)pyrene,
Dibenzanthracene, 3- Methylcholanthrene.
Some toxicants are inhibitors of biotransformation. They
achieve the effect through competitive binding, synthesis
inhibition of heme or cytochrome P450, inactivationdestruction of cytochrome P450 or of the endoplasmic
reticulum. Examples of such chemicals are carbon
tetrachloride, bromobenzene and -naphtyl isocyanate.

presents with more obvious symptoms such as yellowing of the
skin, liver enlargement, itchy skin, dark urine, pale stool, easy
bleeding, blood sugar problems and gallstones.
Liver enlargement is an effect frequently observed in pesticide
toxicity studies. Increases in relative liver weight of <10% are
generally considered to be non-adverse, while increases of
10% are interpreted as being potentially adverse.
Liver is highly exposed to toxic damage because of its high
rate of biotransformation (T8.8).
If the liver did not metabolize benzene, "its half-life would be
100 years" (P450 2E1). Paradoxically, more benzene is
metabolized to toxic species at low doses than at high doses !
Liver cells in culture show a progressive fall in expression of
xenobiotics metabolism (1-2 days), and although some human
B-lymphoblastoid cell lines can be engineered to stably express
human cytochromes P450, it has been very difficult to maintain
true toxic metabolism in vitro.

Some toxicants are unexpectedly powerful.
A rogue tropical seaweed, Caulerpa
taxifolia, is presently spreading in the
Mediterannean. It produces caulerpenyne, a
toxicant which inhibits fish's P450 enzyme
activity to 25% of baseline and alters
metabolite composition. The fish do not need to consume the
seaweed, just be in the neighborhood !

T8.8. Metabolism of various
microsome fractions.
Metabolic Activity
Organ or Tissue
(% of liver microsomes)
Gut
10
Adrenal Cortex
50-75
Testes
10-20
Spleen
5
Heart
3
Muscle
1
Brain
1
Placenta
1
Skin
1

In hygiene, it is not uncommon to add together the percentages
of the TLVs when multiple exposures occur at a single site.
The rough nature of such a procedure is clear if we consider
that even if the two chemicals have quite identical doseresponses, they are unlikely to have similar half-lives.

8.4. Pathology
Decreased liver function can result in any number of symptoms
including fatigue, allergies and chemical sensitivities, acne or
broken blood vessels on the skin, intolerance to fatty foods or
alcohol, changes in mood or weight, changes in cholesterol or
triglyceride levels, nausea and constipation. Overt liver disease
8-8

A cytotoxic agent may proceed through necrosis or apoptosis.
For example, ethanol drives a sequence of cell toxicity,
necrosis, fibrosis, resulting in a fatty liver otherwise known as
cirrhosis. Cirrhosis often results in jaundice and portal
hypertension. The disease may be telomerase-limited.
A cholestatic agent triggers inflammation of the biliary tree
with a decrease in bile flow and excretion.

8.4.3. Pathological Classification of Liver
Injury
T8.11. Hepato-toxicants classified
according to mode of action.
Cytotoxic Agents
Cholestatic Agents
Acetaminophen
Anabolic steroids
Aflatoxin
Arsphenamine
Allyl alcohol
Chlorpromazine
Bromobenzene
Diazepam
Carbon Tetrachloride
Estradial
Dimethylnitrosamine
Mepazine
Phosphorous
Trioridazine
Urethane

8.4.1. Anatomical Classification of Liver Injury
T8.9. The Liver Lobule areas endangered by Hepatotoxins.
Periportal

Midzonal

Acrolein
Albitocin
Allyl alcohol
Arsenic
Iron
Manganese
Phosphorous

Anthrapyrimidine
Beryllium
Carbon tetrachloride
Furosemide
Ngaione
Paraquat

Centrilobular
Acetaminophen
Aflatoxin
Bromobenzene
Carbon tetrachloride
Chloroform
DDT
Dinitrobenzene
Trichloroethylene

8.4.2. Cytological Classification of Liver Injury
T8.10. Hepato-toxicants classified
according to their Target.
Membrane,
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Carbon tetrachloride
Thioacetamide
Phallodin
Dimethylnitrosamine
Allyl alcohol

Mitochondria

Nucleus

Hydrazine
Ethionine
Dichloroethylene
Carbon tetrachloride
Phosphorous

Beryllium
Aflatoxin
Galactosamine
Ethionine
Nitrosamines

F8.12. Large parts of this liver are invaded by carcinoma nodules
(mostly to the left).

Another important pathology of the liver is
hepatocellular carcinoma, characterized by large
malignant tumors throughout the liver (shown) and
hepatomegaly. The most potent hepatocarcinogen
known is aflatoxin B1, from the Aspergillus mould.

8.4.4. Substances promoting Detoxification
Vitamin C is required for Phase 1 detoxification, scavenges
free radicals and protects against damage from reactive oxygen
species (ROS).
8-9

N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) is a glutathione precursor and
protects against ROS damage. Reduced glutathione interacts
with toxins such as heavy metals to make them less reactive
and thereby less damaging to cells. The oxidized glutathione
needs to be replenished. Toxicants such as mercury are
removed from the body by direct conjugation with
glutathione11. Glutathione can be depleted with increased free
radical production during Phase 1 detoxification, resulting in
decreased glutathione conjugation in Phase 2 detoxification,
and the build up of toxins and heavy metals in the liver.
Lipoic acid is a unique antioxidant in that it is both water- and
lipid- soluble. Lipoic acid supplementation may be beneficial
for the management of liver diseases associated with oxidative
stress: alcohol-induced damage, mushroom poisoning, metal
toxicity and carbon tetrachloride poisoning10.

8.5. Action of Toxicants in the Liver
The quest for potency and efficacy in pharmaceuticals leads
industry to purify the active ingredients of natural medicines,
so that they can then be synthesized in pure form. Pure forms
of medicines may reduce toxicity from other ingredients, but
may also concentrate metabolic stress on specific pathways.
Depending on the toxicity of a therapeutic, it may sometimes
be advantageous to use natural extracts, which may induce less
toxicity as well as take advantage of an array of molecules with
similar action.

F8.13. Parathion metabolism. Williams and Burson.
8.5.1.1. Parathion

Parathion is converted to the toxic form (F8.13), paraoxon, by
the enzyme AHH (also known as CYP1A1), resulting in local
hepatic toxicity.
Clinically, attempts are made to remove it from the body by
dialysis and charcoal ingestion. Atropine would be
administered to counter its debilitating effects on the nervous
system.

8.5.1. Enzymatic Activation of Toxicity
The liver’s metabolism can activate toxicity in its attempts at
detoxification. We show here three examples in which this
occurs.

8-10

F8.14. Bromobenzene metabolism. Williams and Burson.

F8.15. Acetaminophen metabolism. Williams and Burson.

8.5.1.2. Bromobenzene

8.5.1.1. Acetaminophen

Bromobenzene results in centrilobular necrosis and is also a
powerful nephrotoxicant. It is metabolically detoxified using
glutathione's sulfur bond.

Approved drugs are frequently recalled from the market, and
clinical trials of experimental drugs are often terminated early
because of drug-induced liver injury. When 36 inbred strains of
mice were given large doses of acetaminophen, large straindependent variations in drug-induced liver injury were found

8-11

(assessed by histology and by elevated serum levels of the liver
enzyme alanine aminotransferase (ALT)8.

with an initial (loading) dose of 140 mg/kg followed by 17
maintenance doses of 70 mg/kg every 4 hours3,7. NAC has a
foul smell and tastes like rotten eggs. Not surprisingly, nausea
and vomiting commonly occur following administration.
Peak plasma levels of NAC occur approximately one hour after
an oral dose and at 12 hours post-dose it is undetectable in
plasma. Despite a relatively low bioavailability of only four to
ten percent, oral administration of NAC appears to be clinically
effective. The biological activity of NAC is attributed to its
sulfhydryl group (yellow), while its acetyl substituted amino
group affords it protection against oxidative and metabolic
processes.

High doses of acetaminophen in humans (15 g) are toxic
through centrilobular necrosis.
As can be seen in F8.15A, acetaminophen adducts are formed
specifically in this region.
F8.15A.
Acetaminophen
injury to the liver.
Liver section from
acetaminophen
treated mouse, 300
mg/kg at 4 hours.
Stained with brown
antibody specific to
acetaminophen
adducts the centrilobular regions.
Bluish regions are
peri-portal. Josephy

The nomogram below (F.8.16) is a nice application of
toxicokinetics, but should not be used to downgrade the
administration of NAC over time.
NAC is a good example of a compound which can have
deleterious or protective effects, depending on its
compartimentalization. In F8.17, the number of mutant cells
produced as a function of NAC concentration is plotted for two
cases: pretreatment and simultaneous treatment with NAC.
In pretreatment, NAC is first metabolized to increased
intracellular glutathione, which enhances activation of MNNG
near the target molecule, after it enters the cells. This results in
more mutants. In simultaneous treatment, MNNG is activated
by NAC extracellularly, and the reactive intermediate
harmlessly reacts with extracellular water.

and Mannervik, 2006.

Quantitation of pathways (see F8.15):
Path 1: Sulfate 52%, Glucoronide 42%, Unchanged: 2% .
Path 2: 4% in toxic pathway when 70% of glutathione has
been consumed.
Oral N-acetylcysteine (NAC, shown),
a precursor of glutathione, is the
standard therapy for acetaminophen
overdose. NAC is administered orally

8-12

acetaminophen toxicity, while snakes are highly sensitive.
8.5.1.2. Halogenated Alkanes/Alkenes

These hepatotoxic chemicals (T8.18) also involve other target
organs (T8.19). They are not toxic by themselves, but are

F8.17. Mutagenicity of MNNG depending on the timing and
concentration of NAC treatment. Romert and Jenssen, 1987.

biotransformed into toxic intermediates: radicals and
epoxides3,4.
Carbon tetrachloride and chloroform result in vivo in specific
cytotoxic intermediates (F8.20). The detoxification of the
radicals (carbene, peroxy) and the intermediate (phosgene)
involves their conjugation with glutathione (GSH) until stores
of GSH are depleted. The isolation and identification of these
unstable intermediates has been extremely difficult. Hepatic
biotransformation proceeds too rapidly, but biotransformation
by renal homogenates or fractions is much slower, and we now
know all of the toxic products arising from carbon tetrachloride
biotransformation.

F8.16. Rumack-Matthew nomogram for acetaminophen intoxication
from serum values. Rumack J, Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2002;40(1):3-20.

Note that mice that do not express CYP2E1 do not suffer from

8-13

T8.18. Some halogenated alkanes/alkenes.
Carbon tetrachloride
CCl4
Chloroform
CHCl3
Trichloroethane
CH2Cl-CHCl2
Trichloroethylene
CHCl-CCl2
Halothane
CF3-CHClBr
CCl3F CCl2F2 CClF2-CFCl2 CClF2-CClF2
Freons
Despite the concerns about occupational exposure to such
agents as carbon tetrachloride or chloroform (a possible human
carcinogen), chloroform was used as a "safe" anesthetic (it did
not explode like diethyl ether) until the hepatotoxicity was
T8.19. Toxicity of haloforms. *on acute exposure when catecholamines
are administered concomitantly. Other haloforms show the same property.

Compound
CCl4
CHCl3
Halothane
Methoxylfurane
Freons
Vinyl Chloride
Perchloroethylene

Hepatotoxic
X
X
X

Nephrotoxic
X
X

Cardiotoxic

X
X*
X
X

recognized. Carbon tetrachloride is still used as an antiparasitic
agent (vermifuge) in third-world nations because it is cheap
and effective, and can be administered orally in capsules.
Understandably, you should not give it too often (once a year),
for fear of hepatic toxicity.
The signs and symptoms of halogenated alkane hepatotoxicity

F8.20. Reductive dehalogenation of CCl4 to a trichloromethyl free
radical that initiates lipid peroxidation.

include protracted nausea and vomiting, severe prostration,
jaundice, enlarged palpable liver (right side below rib cage or
below sternum) and elevated serum transferases.

8-14

Via a needle biopsy, one can see swollen cells and fatty
degeneration, predominantly in the centrilobular area but
radiating out toward the portal triads (the mid-zonal regions of
the lobule), as coagulative necrosis.
At necropsy, one sees an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) with
accentuated lobulation having a pale appearance or the
classical "pearly" liver - surface cells outlined with a ring of
lipid around each. Cells around the central vein have a pale
appearance upon staining and contain large fat globules.
A gradient in necrotic damage is seen from the central vein out
into the mid-zonal regions, most severe in the central vein
region.
It is apparent that the Kupffer cells play some role in carbon
tetrachloride induced hepatotoxicity5. Carbon tetrachloride
appears to activate Kupffer cells by increasing their intracellular levels of calcium ions which, in turn, trigger the release
of cytokines and eicosanoids (leukotrienes). Those are
chemotactic factors for neutrophils which become activated,
are attracted to the region, and secrete superoxide anion and
other toxic mediators which amplify the inflammatory response
leading to cell injury and death. It is important to appreciate
that the above mechanism of hepatotoxicity is not unique to
carbon tetrachloride but applies to all haloalkanes and alkenes
and, perhaps, to other hepatotoxicants as well.
Back in the 1960s, there was considerable concern about the
severe hepatotoxicity witnessed when halothane was first used
as an anesthetic. Halothane was almost "finished" in the
marketplace before it was realized that the anesthesia machines
through which it was administered had copper kettles in which
the anesthetic was placed before air was passed over it. The
high cost of this anesthetic (250 $ for 100 ml) meant that the
residual anesthetic was kept, frequently left in the copper

chamber. Of course, halothane is covered with halogens (F, Cl,
and Br) which react in the presence of copper to produce a
toxic intermediate which the next patient receives when
anesthetized. When the copper chamber was replaced by glass,
hepatotoxicity dropped sharply. As yet, not all of the possible
biotransformation products of halothane have been identified
(F8.21).

F8.21. Activation of halothane by reductive and oxidative
dehalogenation. Their role in rat and human liver toxicity.
Casarett & Doull.

8-15

enhances the
biotransformation of
other chemicals to
which the subject may
be exposed.

8.5.2. Natural Hepatotoxicants
Cyanobacterial blooms often take place in lakes during
sustained warm spells in autumn. Cyanobacterial hepatotoxins
can kill a drinker within 24 hours. The toxins attack a protein
in the membrane of liver cells, and the cell membrane breaks
down. Subjects die from internal bleeding.

F8.22. Structures of
persistent halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbons
capable of long-term
induction of tissue
enzymes.

8.5.3. Persistence of Hepatotoxicity
Many chemicals can exert subtle effects on the liver,
specifically those that the liver finds difficult to biotransform,
or the liposoluble ones that penetrate cell membranes and are
stored in the body for exceptionally long periods of time.
Detectable blood levels of brominated and chlorinated dioxins
can be demonstrated 35 years after exposure3. The effects of
these agents during that period are uncertain. We all possess
low adipose tissue stores of DDT and PCBs that are slowly
released.
The oldest example of such agents is the insecticide DDT, not
very toxic, difficult to biotransform, highly liposoluble,
persistent for decades both in environmental food chains and in
the human body. Much of the body burden is stored in the
adipose tissue, with a small amount circulating in the
bloodstream.
Polychlorinated biphenyls, dioxins, and furans (F8.22) are not
terribly toxic to the liver but are very liposoluble and persistent
in vivo.
TCDD is the most toxic of the congeners to animals.
The liver treats such agents as if they were a high level
exposure situation, even though the level may be quite modest.
If the liver cannot biotransform the agent, enzymes are induced
in the hope of eliminating them. This is the liver's only
response to a situation that is perplexing to it. However, the
resistant chemicals remain and the elevated enzymatic activity

The Phase I and II
enzymes will not
decline back to
normal, since the
agent persists in the
bloodstream,
maintaining an alert
state.

8.6. Tests of Liver Function
Tests of hepatic injury are serum enzyme tests (below), hepatic
excretion tests (sulfobromophthalein, indocyanine green), tests
on alteration of the liver’s chemical constituents and
histological analysis of liver injury.
Current hepatic tests in the clinic are blood tests that detect the
presence of damage or inflammation, rather than how well the
liver functions.
Severe hepatic damage results in leakage of a number of
cytosolic (soluble) enzymes (SGOT, SGPT, LDH, Sorbitol
DeHydrogenase, etc.) through the hepatocellular membrane,
with sharp elevations of these species in serum where only low
8-16

levels are usually found. This may persist for prolonged
periods of time. Particularly with PCBs, one will find elevated
serum triglycerides and sometimes cholesterol, as well as
serum enzymes and dermatological acne for months and even
years1,2.
An example of carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic damage in
rats (F8.23) shows which enzymes are diagnostic for toxicity.
The same can be seen in humans. However, hepatocellular
damage occurs at different rates with different chemicals, and
one blood sample may not yield the desired diagnostic results.
For example, benzene will produce damage (and enzyme
release) in approximately 8 hr whereas, with carbon
tetrachloride, it takes more than 24 hr before significant
cellular damage and enzyme leakage occurs.
Fasting Serum Bile Acid (SBA) determination can be used
clinically in the diagnosis and prognosis of liver disease in
conjunction with standard liver function tests. Because of the
sensitivity of SBA determination as compared to standard liver
function tests, SBA offers significant additional diagnostic
information concerning liver function, especially in minor
hepatic derangements. It is of particular benefit in the
determination of hepatic dysfunction as a result of chemical
environmental injury.
Liver injury as a result of occupational or environmental
exposure to a wide variety of chemical substances can be
determined to a much finer degree by SBA than by standard
liver enzymes, especially when the liver has been only slightly
damaged. In one study of individuals exposed to organic
solvents, 73% of the exposed cases had elevated SBA levels,

liver function tests are not sensitive enough to determine
hepatic dysfunction caused by such organic solvents as toluene,
xylene, acetone, styrene, n-butlyacetate, n-butanol,
ethylacetate, other aromatic hydrocarbons and ketones6.
There are a number of useful clinical tests beyond serum
enzymes, such as:
Functional test: clearance of bilirubin or dyes (bromosulfo-phthalein, indocyanine green).
Albumin is a major protective blood protein formed in
the normal liver. Levels below 3.5 mg/dL are abnormal.
Prothrombin Time: clot formation is indicative of liver
function. Blood from the patient is oxalated to prevent
coagulation. Later, large amounts of calcium and tissue
extract are mixed in. Prothrombin starts transforming to
thrombin, leading to coagulation. Normal is about 12
seconds. Deviations of more than 2 seconds are
abnormal.
Liver scan using radio-opaque chemical.

8.7. In Vitro Liver Experimentation
A number of products are available on the market to
experiment in vitro on liver function. Fresh animal hepatocytes,
cryopreserved hepatocytes from various species (shown),
individual and pooled microsomes or S9 fraction.
Cryopreserved hepatocytes should be
stored at less than -150ºC to assure longterm viability. Microsomes and S9 should
be stored at less than -70ºC to preserve
P450 enzymes.
Primary hepatocytes, when cultured, begin
to lose liver-specific gene expression
within just a few days, unless co-cultured
with non-parenchymal cells (non-liver) such as fibroblasts or
endothelial cells9.

whereas increased levels of SGGT, alanine aminotransferase
ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and bilirubin were
observed respectively in 8, 3, 2, and 1% of exposed workers.
These results and others support the hypothesis that standard
8-17

T8.23. Hepatic damage in male rats with 0.1 ml/kg of CCl4.
Serum enzyme activity, 3 days post treatment.
Enzyme name
Control
Treated
Increase
Target Tissue
Alanine Aminotransferase
(ALT, formerly SGPT)
42 ± 4
440
10x
Liver & heart
Aspartate Aminotransferase
(AST, formerly SGOT)
Liver & muscle
91.2 ± 11
720
8x

8.8. Temporary Liver Support
Liver regeneration may actually occur from bone marrow cells,
as was recently found. First, bone marrow stem cells may serve
as a source for the replacement of endothelial cells. Second,
hematopoietic cells, including lymphocytes, neutrophils,
macrophages, and platelets, may provide crucial factors
required for efficient healing of damaged liver.
When regeneration fails, temporary liver support (F8.24) can
be very important. In acetaminophen intoxication, for example,
if the patient survives, complete liver recovery can occur.
ALP and SGGT reflect cholestatic injury more effectively than
necrotic injury. LDH, AST and ALT are more sensitive to
cytotoxic hepatic injury. These enzyme determinations are less
sensitive than histological pathology.

Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP)
Bones & liver
917.2 ± 51

Acid phosphatase
Creatine
(phospho)kinase (CPK)
Cardiac/skeletal muscle
Gamma Glutamyl
Transaminase (SGGT)
Cholestasis
Lactate
Dehydrogenase (LDH)
Muscle, Erythrocyte, liver

2560

20.9 ± 2

43.8

218 ± 61

284

3x

F8.24. Research
in Temporary
Liver Support.

2x

After
alcohol
intake

108 ± 31

1019

9x

8-18

The lemonade therefore seemed implicated. By this time, of course, the family had
discarded any remaining lemonade (always a problem in these types of cases).

8.9. Case Study: Acute Dimethyl
Nitrosamine Poisoning

The child died. The next day the man died. After that, the CDC was called. The
county health department wanted to know what they should do, what kind of tests
they should run, and what kind of samples they should take from the man. The CDC
suggested that, in addition to taking tissues as is normally done for microscopic
examination, they should also freeze tissue so that chemical analysis could be
performed on the tissue if it became necessary to do so.

(modified from Williams & Burson)
In Omaha, Nebraska, the county health department became concerned because there
seemed to be an outbreak of a new disease; five people had suddenly become ill.
The sick patients experienced vomiting, severe abdominal cramps, diarrhea, and two
of them developed bruising. The first person had become ill on a Sunday morning
while painting his house. Later in the day, his 2½ year-old daughter became sick.
During the afternoon, his wife's sister, her husband, and another child visited them.
They stayed for a little while, drank some lemonade while there, and left. At six
o'clock that night, they had also started feeling ill.
The man who had become ill early Sunday morning went to emergency rooms and
then to a number of physicians, but he was repeatedly told he had the flu and should
go home, rest, and take aspirin. Later, he developed severe nosebleeds; his nose was
packed twice in emergency rooms early in the week. After each episode he was sent
home again. He persisted in seeing physicians and, finally, on Thursday of that
week, he walked into a physician's office and collapsed. At that point he was
admitted to a hospital. On admission he showed abnormal liver function tests. The
fact that his bilirubin was elevated also indicated a liver problem. The reason for the
bleeding problems was that his platelets were severely decreased; there were about
6,000/mm3 instead of the 150,000-300,000/mm3 or more that would be normal.

The autopsies of the father and child produced two common findings. One was that
severe liver damage was the cause of death. In addition, there was extensive
bleeding owing to the decrease in platelets. There were no other significant findings.
No other organs were specifically affected. Review of the liver sections and other
organs did not suggest an infection, because there was no inflammatory reaction in
the tissues.
The question was, what type of chemical would produce these toxic effects? Quite a
number of chemicals damage the liver, but they usually affect other organs as well.
Because the investigation implicated the lemonade and the people had not
complained about the lemonade's tasting peculiar, the chemical had to be something
that did not taste strange and something that was water soluble. These observations
somewhat limited the number of compounds. The substance also had to be relatively
toxic so that a person would ingest a lethal dose by drinking a single or a half glass
of lemonade in which this material was dissolved.
At the CDC we examined a number of the more common compounds that cause
liver necrosis. We did not include in the list of compounds substances that, like
carbon tetrachloride, severely affect the liver but also affect the sensorium Carbon
tetrachloride also has some effect on the kidneys but would be detected by people
drinking lemonade. Portions of the liver tissues were examined for arsenic and
yellow phosphorus.
None of this made very much sense. We searched further. Some people are sensitive
to acetaminophen, a pain medicine. It can damage the liver, but typically not
everyone in a family suddenly becomes ill. Usually there is a history of the patient's
having taken this medication, but these patients had not taken acetaminophen.
Aflatoxin, a mycotoxin and another hepatotoxin was also a suspect, but it would be
very difficult to have access to this type of compound. Furthermore, the microscopic
appearance of the liver did not suggest aflatoxin. However, certain types of
alkylating agents that are either used in cancer chemotherapy or cancer research
might selectively damage the liver and could cause the severe centrilobular liver
necrosis.
In talking to the county health department, I asked for additional information about
the family to determine whether they would have had any contact with people in a
cancer research institute or a hospital. The county health department thought this
was a peculiar idea, but passed the request on to the police. A police officer in
Omaha went to his files and found that this family did indeed know a man who was
now working at the Eppley Institute in Omaha, which is a cancer research institute.

Because he became comatose, the child of the family who had visited the home on
Sunday afternoon had already been admitted to another hospital. It took the hospitals
a while to recognize that there might be a connection between the two cases. Once
that was established, the county health department was called. The county health
department then started looking at the other people who had visited the home and
eventually established that of this group-a total of ten people who had been
involved-five were ill and all of them had abnormal liver function tests. They all had
low platelet counts. Not all of the people had platelet counts as low as those of the
man or of the child who had visited the home.
After interviewing all who had visited the home on the Sunday when the illnesses
were first noticed, the health department investigators concluded that the vehicle for
the illness-causing agent must have been food or drink. The only food item all the ill
people had consumed was lemonade. The parents of the man who had first become
ill had visited the home, but while they were there, they did not consume any food or
drink; they did not become ill. A sister living with the first family did not drink
lemonade and did not become ill; and a baby did not eat any foods because it was
being breastfed. The fact that the baby did not become ill eliminated to some extent
the possibility of a highly contagious illness (except possibly a food-borne
organism).

8-19

Five years earlier this man had had a love affair with the wife of the man who later
died, and had confronted the family with a gun; shots had been fired. He had then
been sentenced to prison and was free on parole. Because he held a degree in
biology, he was able to obtain a job at the Eppley Institute. His job was to mix diets
for cancer research studies in animals, and one of the compounds he was working
with was the alkylating agent dimethyl nitrosamine. The essential chemical structure
of dimethyl nitrosamine is

however. We were able to show this in court and the man who poisoned the family
was convicted.

REFERENCES

1. Phenylpropanolamine potentiation of acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity: evidence of a glutathione-dependent
mechanism. James, R.C. et al. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 118, 159-168, 1993.
2. Occupational liver injury. Present state of knowledge and future perspective. Dossing, M. and Skinhoj, P. Int. Arch.
Occup. Environ. Health 56, 1-21, 1985.
3. Carbon tetrachloride toxicity potentiated by isopropyl alcohol. Folland, D.S. et al. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 236, 18531856, 1976.
4. Chronic carbon tetrachloride intoxication. Stewart, A. and Witts, L.J. Br. J. Indus. Med. 50, 7-16, 1993.
5. The involvement of Kupffer cells in carbon tetrachloride toxicity. Edwards, M.J. et al. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 119,
275-279, 1993.
6. Serum bile acid concentrations as a liver function test in workers occupationally exposed to organic solvents. Franco
G, Fonte R, Tempinin G, and Candura F. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 58:157-64, 1986.
7. Nuclear receptor-dependent bile acid signaling is required for normal liver regeneration. Huang W et al, Science 312
(April 14):233-236, 2006.
8. Mouse population-guided resequencing reveals that variants in CD44 contribute to acetaminophen-induced liver
injury in humans. Harrill AH et al. Genome Res. 19, 10.1101/gr.090241.108 (2009).
9. The co-culture: a system for studying the regulation of liver differentiation/proliferative activity and its control. Cell.
Biol. Toxicol. 13:235-242, 1997.
10. Alpha-lipoic acid in liver metabolism and disease. Bustamante J, Lodge JK, Marcocci L, et al. Free Rad Biol Med.
1998;24:1023-39.
11. Mechanisms of mercury disposition in the body. Clarkson TW, Vyas JB, Ballatori N. Am J Ind Med. 2007;50(10):75764.

Generalized structure of N-nitroso
compounds
Dimethyl nitrosamine was eventually
established as the compound that caused the
illness and death in the family. While the
family was away from their house, the suspect
had climbed into a back window and added the
poison to a pitcher of lemonade found in the refrigerator. His intention was to cause
the people to have cancer; he wanted to watch them die. However, he picked a
chemical that was also very acutely toxic. The oral LD50 in rats for dimethyl
nitrosamine ranges between 27 and 41 mg/kg of body weight. The calculated lethal
amount required for a child is less than one gram and for an adult roughly three
grams.
Dimethyl nitrosamine is a yellow oil, so it mixes very well with lemonade. It is
water soluble. It is somewhat more stable in a slightly acid environment. Other
nitrosamines were examined to determine whether some other compound could have
produced the effects evident in this case. They were ruled out for a number of
reasons, and they were also not available at the institute. Many are not nearly as
toxic, and the other more toxic nitrosamines do not specifically cause the selective
centrilobular liver necrosis.
Dimethyl nitrosamine is very rapidly metabolized and excreted; therefore, five days
after poisoning (the time that elapsed before investigation of this case began), all of
the material would be metabolized and excreted and would not be found in the body.
Nitrosamines and other alkylating agents do one thing by which they can be traced,
however. They methylate nucleic acids. such as, for example, guanine.
There is now a test that has been developed, using high pressure liquid
chromatography, by which methylation of guanine can actually be measured. Early
in our investigation liver tissue from one of our patients was frozen. A total of eight
tissue samples were then blindly submitted for analysis: seven controls and our
sample. The chemist analyzed the eight samples and identified methylated guanine
in the liver specimen that turned out to be our sample. Products like methylated
guanine are also excreted in urine and would also probably be measurable in urine
specimens. It is presently not possible to demonstrate methylation with acute yet
nontoxic doses because the method is presently not sensitive enough. The amount of
the concentration found in the liver of the adult male was as high as those
demonstrated in rats that have been acutely poisoned with dimethyl nitrosamine,

8-20

9.1. Roles of the Kidney .2
9.2. Physiology. 3
9.2.1. Aldosterone . 5
9.2.2. Anti Diuretic Hormone (ADH) . 5
9.2.3. Renal Erythropoietin Factor . 5
9.2.4. Metabolism of Calcium .5
9.3. Pathology . 6
9.3.1. Glomerulus Pathology .6
9.3.2. Tubule Pathology .6
9.4. Toxicity . 8
9.4.1. Heavy Metals . 8
9.4.1.1. Cd . 8
9.4.1.2. Pb . 9
9.4.1.2.1. EDTA Therapy . 10
9.4.1.3. Hg . 10
9.4.1.4. Cr. 10
9.4.2. Ethylene Glycol . 10
9.4.3. Organic Solvents. 11
9.5. Tests of Kidney Function . 11
9.5.1. Creatinine Clearance . 12
9.5.2. Glomerular Filtration Rate . 12
9.5.3. Tubular Secretion Rate . 13
9.5.4. Artificial kidneys . 13
9.5.5. In Vitro . 13
9.6. Short Kidney Cases . 14
9.6.1. Kidney Case #1 . 14
9.6.2. Kidney Case #2 . 14
9.6.3. Kidney Case #3 . 14
9.6.4. Kidney Case #4 . 15
9.6.5. Kidney Case #5 . 15
9.7. Case Study: Acute Arsine Poisoning . 15
9.8. Bangladesh and Arsenic (National Geographic, 2002) 16
9-1

9.
9.1. Roles of the Kidney
The kidney is the main
organ responsible for the
expulsion of endogenous
metabolites and xenobiotics.
F9.1. Gross anatomy of the
kidney. Atlas of Normal Anatomy.

Its functions are:
  Glomerular filtration, (a
passive process),
  Tubular reabsorption,
  Tubular secretion (an
 
 
 
 

active process),
Regulation of extracellular volume,
Regulation of electrolyte balance (a familiar example of
imbalance results in muscle cramps),
Acid-base regulation,
Calcium metabolism.

F9.2. Kidney anatomy. Germann & Stanfield, 2002.

There are approximately 106 nephrons per kidney, with a total
length of approximately 120 km. There are indications that
mothers restricted in protein give rise to offspring with fewer
nephrons. The remaining overworked nephrons release
hormones and retain sodium. The offspring is then vulnerable
to hypertension3.

The length, the large surface area and the thin barrier between
the lumen of the tubule and the extensive capillary blood
supply (F9.2) insures a rapid transport of many substances.
Approximately 20 to 25% of the blood pumped out of the heart
each minute is routed through the kidneys. They filter the
entire blood volume every 4 to 5 minutes.

9-2

< F9.3. Functions of the Kidney Tubule.

The kidney loses 20% of the plasma volume through the
glomerulus, which acts like a sieve, and recuperates the needed
components later, glucose at a rate of 99.96%, using the
proximal and distal tubule. Therefore, the overall personality of
the kidney is that it is a recycling organ.
In F9.2, note that the medulla consists only of tubular
structures for blood and urine and that the glomeruli are located
in the cortex.
The nephron is a very active tissue, as glomerular filtration
occurs on-goingly with tubular secretion and reabsorption.
The kidney has the same enzymes (Phase I, II) as the liver, but
with only 20% of the activity. While low exposure levels of
toxicants probably pose no problems for the kidney, moderate
and high levels might.

9.2. Physiology
Xenobiotics biotransformed into water soluble products will
most likely be excreted by passive filtration through the
glomerulus and into the urine. By contrast, lipid-soluble,
nonionized chemicals will be passively re-absorbed into the
blood from the lumen.
The various segments (A-E) of F9.3 describe components of
tubule functions.
A – All glucose and amino acids are recuperated, unless
transport mechanisms are overwhelmed. Normally, only 0.04%
of glucose is lost.
Sodium is actively reabsorbed in the tubule (A and C) and
hydrogen ions are actively secreted as a substitute (C), so the
pH of the urine becomes acidic (from 7.4 to 6.5-6.0).
9-3

Cl and water follow Na (B), itself excreted in proportion to
intake.
pH values in the urine range from 4.7 to 8, with a normal of 6.
The control results from the combined effects of the various
buffer systems, particularly the carbonate, phosphate and
ammonia buffer systems.
For organic acid excretion, a basic urine is desirable; for
organic base excretion, acidic urine is desirable.
For example, the glucuronide of the xenobiotic phenol is more
polar and more water soluble at pH 6.5 than at pH 7.4 (the pH
of the blood), and so can be more easily eliminated.
For organic bases, the acid pH of the urine enhances the
polarity of the excreted product and insures that it remains in
the fluid, and is not re-absorbed.
F9.4. Structures of the Kidney. Biological Structures. >

B - Urea, formed in the liver from metabolism of proteins, has
a pKa of 0.1.
According to the
HendersonHasselbalch equation,
a miniscule amount is
non-ionized in the
plasma, but lowering the urine pH allows for somewhat
increased passive reabsorption. Ultimately, about 55% of urea
is reabsorbed. Its usefulness may be that it acts as an antioxidant in the blood.
E – Many toxicants are secreted in the proximal tubule, but can
be reabsorbed, if not ionized, all along the tubule.
Some detoxification products, particularly those conjugated to
glutathione, may be partially reabsorbed and may be toxic at
the point of entry. Thioethers (R-C-S-C-R) are particularly
nephrotoxic.
9-4

9.2.4. Metabolism of Calcium
Calcium concentration in the blood is controlled by parathyroid
hormone, which prevents it from falling too low, and by
calcitonin, which prevents it from going too high. But there is
only 1 g of Ca in extracellular fluid. In diarrhea, several grams
of Ca can be passed in the feces each day. Therefore, bone acts
as a Ca buffer. Parathyroid hormone secretion allows complete
reabsorption of Ca in the kidneys.

The tubular processes of secretion are controlled by a number
of endogenous substances.
9.2.1. Aldosterone
It controls blood volume and
therefore maintains blood
pressure, by enhancing salt
reabsorption in the tubule, which
is followed by a corresponding water intake. Renin, from the
juxtaglomerular cells, changes angiotensinogen to angiotensin
I, to angiotensin II and finally to aldosterone, which is issued
from the adrenal cortex.

Diuretics are medical agents used to treat edema (compartment
syndrome, brain swelling) and hypertension (which can lead to
kidney disease). There are a
number of categories of diuretics:
osmotic agents (mannitol),

9.2.2. Anti Diuretic Hormone (ADH)
Also known as vasopressin, controls
urine concentration by increasing
reabsorption of water in the distal
tubule.

loop agents
(furosemide),

9.2.3. Renal Erythropoietin Factor
This factor increases RBC production and
explains why chronic kidney failure often
leads to anemia. Erythropoietin is
produced in the proximal tubule cells, the
same area where lead is known to
accumulate in the kidney8.

thiazides (chlorothiazide shown),

aldosterone antagonists or ADH antagonists, that all act at
various points along the tubules.

9-5

9.3.1. Glomerulus Pathology

9.3. Pathology

Pores of the normal glomerulus are about 0.01 µm, 100 times
larger than those of capillaries in skeletal muscle. They limit
molecule penetration to about 70,000 Daltons.
The filtration of albumin, a negatively charged molecule, is
more restricted than neutral dextran of equivalent size. Loss of
the fixed negative charge of the glomerular capillary wall
results in enhanced filtration of anions. With loss of charge
discrimination in glomerulonephritis, the capillary wall
becomes size-selective only.
Proteinuria is often the first indication that disease is present.
Normally there is a net protein excretion of 40 to 80 mg/day.
Abnormal proteinuria is a protein excretion in excess of 150
mg/day. The classic intoxicator specific to the glomerulus is
the immune complex. Toxic action in the glomerulus leads to
decreased filtration rates, for example, with some drugs
(gentamycin, kanamycin) or increased albuminemia
(puromycin).

Change in kidney function is often described using creatinine
clearance as an index, and the Cruikshank formula:

Creatinine Clearance 

(140  Age)  Body Weight
72  Serum Creatinine

Creatinine clearance in ml/minute, age in years, body weight in
kg, serum creatinine in mg/dl. For women, multiply the figure
by 0.85.
From a peak of kidney function at about 20 years of age, the
creatinine clearance decays (because fewer nephrons are
functional) such that by 60 years of age about a quarter of
kidneys are considered defective, and the organs would cease
functioning entirely at age 140.
The glomerulus is most vulnerable to immune complexes. The
proximal tubule is vulnerable to halogenated hydrocarbons,
heavy metals, antibiotics, antineoplastics and mycotoxins. The
Loop of Henle is specifically vulnerable to fluoride ions.
Clinically, two entities are often distinguished.

9.3.2. Tubule Pathology
The tubule cells are subjected to high toxicant concentrations,
even to possible crystallization.

Nephr o tic syndrome: characterized by proteinuria.
Inducible by exposure to lead or heroin, as well as
prolonged standing and strenuous exercise. Typical
presenting features of nephrotic syndrome are marked
edema, proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and usually
hyperlipidemia.
Nephr i tic syndrome:
characterized by hematuria. It can
be induced by mercury and
phenacetin (shown).

In shock, reduced blood flow to the kidney does not allow the
high tubule metabolism to be sustained, and tubular cells go
into apoptosis. Normally, neighboring cells will stretch over
the missing ones within a couple of hours, but with more
apoptosis, serious lesions occur.
Toxicants (heavy metals, antibiotics, barbiturates, organic
solvents) also can produce this effect, called acute tubular
necrosis. Reduced urine flow causes buildup of toxic wastes in
the body, leading to death.
9-6

Reabsorption of glucose and amino acids can be impaired by
Cd, Pb, Hg, leading to glycosuria and aminoaciduria. Secretion
of H+, K+ and xenobiotics can also be impaired.

F9.6. Epithelial crescents
(arrow) are found in a majority
of the glomeruli in kidneys
affected by rapidly progressing
glomerulonephritis. Scientific

One major site of nephrotoxicity is the proximal convoluted
tubule (F9.2), regardless of the nature of the toxicant.
There are three reasons for this…

American Medicine.

(1) the content of the
tubules becomes
concentrated, as water
is recycled (97.5% of
the water is recovered). Cells lining the tubules are irritated
by toxicant concentration, and the formation of crystalline
structures from marginally soluble toxicants,
(2) detoxification and unmetabolized products are drawn into
the cells of the proximal tubule along with water, and
remain there while water moves on into the bloodstream,
(3) de-conjugation biotransformation, e.g. de-glucuronidation,
de-sulphation yield uncovered reactive intermediates which
cause cell damage.
A good example is the drug
sulfamethizole, introduced many years
ago. Its advantage over sulfanilamide is
that it is not extensively metabolized in vivo, and exerts a
prolonged action. However, one has to "push fluids", because
sulphamethizole can precipitate in the tubule, causing
laceration to the border cells, and bloody urine. This problem
can be avoided by drinking a lot of water to keep the solution
diluted, so that precipitation does not occur.
There are also active secretory mechanisms located in the
proximal tubule, one for organic bases and one for organic

F9.5 In patients with sickle cell disease, who present with chronic renal
disease and proteinuria, marked glomerular enlargement is present,
often with mesangial expansion and segmental sclerosis. This
glomerulus (thin black circle) shows glomerulomegaly and mesangial
expansion. There is abundant brown pigment, representing broken
down hemoglobin, in surrounding tubules (thin blue ovals), and
interstitial fibrosis and vascular sclerosis.
Hematoxylin and eosin, x100. Atlas of Renal Pathology, National Kidney Foundation.

9-7

acids (F9.3E). As with any active process, carrier protein and
enzymes are involved, energy is required, and these secretory
pathways can be saturated. Any damage to the proximal tubular
cells by agents in the lumen can affect the active secretion
process.

Before toxicity is observed, the kidney will retain significant
amounts of heavy metals, some (Hg, Pb) bound to various
intra-cellular proteins, e.g. lysosomal acidic lipoproteins
followed by a lysosomal endocytosis of these metal-protein
complexes. The mitochondria are particularly susceptible to
damage, and one sees autophagy of damaged subcellular
organelles and extrusion of denatured proteins, all possibly
protective reactions.

Effects of chemical exposure on renal function can be very
insidious and subtle, evading detection for a long time. This is
partly due to the redundant capacity in the kidney, where only
about 25% of nephrons are used at any one time. An increased
fluid load will bring additional nephrons into play, but after the
"crisis", the extra nephrons reduce their activity. Considerable
damage can occur in the kidney, with complete loss of many
nephrons, before no reserve capacity remains. By that time, the
damage may not be reversible.

9.4.1.1. Cd

The kidney is the most sensitive organ to cadmium. About 5%
of the US population has enough exposure to cadmium to
injure the kidneys. The liver is the main synthesizer of a small
(6,500 Dalton, 61 amino acids, 20 of which are cysteine)
specific protein, metallothionein (MT), rich in free -SH groups,
which binds (chelates) up to seven atoms of Cd, as well as Zn
and Cu. The Cd-MT complex is stored in soft tissues of the
body such as liver and kidney (which contains 10 times more
than the liver). Metallothioneins are a surprisingly diverse
group of molecules, but they are spread in a vast range to
taxonomic groups, from prokaryotes and up. Metallothioneins
have diverse metal-binding preferences. The rat’s MT1 prefers
binding divalent metal ions (Zn(II), Cd(II),.), while yeast
CUP1 prefers binding monovalent metal ions (Cu(I), Ag(I),.).

9.4. Toxicity
9.4.1. Heavy Metals
Nephrotoxic Metals: Cadmium, Lead, Mercury,
Arsenic, Bismuth, Chromium, Platinum, Thallium, Uranium.
The kidney is the main route of heavy metal excretion from the
body, and most heavy metals are nephrotoxic.
At relatively low levels, a variety of signs and symptoms
appear: glycosuria, aminoaciduria and polyuria, pointing to
problems in efficient reabsorption in the proximal tubule.
At higher levels and at later stages in chronic exposure,
elevated Blood Urea Nitrogen, renal necrosis, and anuria will
precede death.
The histological picture is one of necrotic proximal tubules
with the adjacent lumen filled with proteinaceous material.

When exposure to Cd exceeds the ability of tissues to
synthesize MT and to store the Cd-MT complex, toxicity
occurs above 300 µg Cd/g of cortical tissue. The complex is
excreted via glomerular filtration, but can be reabsorbed in the
proximal tubule. It was once thought that free Cd in tubular
cells was the toxicant, but more recent evidence shows that the
Cd-MT complex is toxic.

9-8

Cd normally accumulated in kidneys until age 50. It s half-life
may be as long as 30 years. It is recommended that Cd intake
not exceed 70 µg/day.
Progressively, low molecular weight proteinuria appears and
cells concentrating Cd are lost, the Cd then evacuated in the
urine. Chronic intoxication produces irreversible renal failure.

of Cd from consumption of vegetables. Gastrointestinal
absorption is 6%. Smoking doubles the daily Cd dose.
Prolonged exposure to moderate levels of Cd in rice (0.3-1.0
µg/g) resulted during and after WW II in a strange muscular
condition known in Japan as Itai Itai Byo (or ouch-ouch
disease). It is characterized by deep muscle and bone pain of
considerable severity, and bone deformation. Renal effects
include proteinuria (particularly low molecular weight
proteins), aminoaciduria (with elevated proline and
hydroxyproline, suggestive of problems in bone metabolism),
glucosuria and reduced absorption of phosphate and enhanced
excretion of calcium (hypercalcuria)1. The proximal tubule is
the target site.
The effects were seen predominantly in older women,
multiparous, calcium, and protein deficient. Cadmium
absorption in the gastrointestinal tract can be enhanced by
dietary deficiency of calcium, iron, and protein. Being older,
and having had a number of children, these women would have
been calcium deficient. Dietary problems during the war would
have insured an enhanced absorption of Cd. Estimates
exceeded 150 µg/day from food (mainly rice). The source of
this Cd was paddy irrigation water taken from a river
downstream from a metals mine, which allowed tailings and
washings to run uncontrolled into the river for many years.

F9.7. Cadmium toxicity. Boelsterli, 2007.

9.4.1.2. Pb

Cd also produces brittleness as it replaces Ca in bones.

Lead causes two types of kidney toxicity in humans:
(1) proximal tubular damage reflected in glucosuria,
aminoaciduria, hyperphosphaturia and problems of
reabsorption,
(2) glomerular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis and sclerosis
of vessels seen at prolonged, high level exposure, resulting in
chronic nephritis.
Only the proximal tubular effects can be reversed with
chelation therapy.

Cadmium has worrisome estrogenic effects in cell culture. Data
from rats show that cadmium can act as an estrogen mimic in
the whole animal, inducing conditions ranging from uterine
hyperplasia to early onset of puberty5.
Cd is important in electroplating and color pigments. The
greatest concentrations are found in the liver and kidneys of
animals. Shellfish often have high concentrations.
There has recently been concern in Sweden over body burdens
9-9

Chronic poisoning: proteinuria, glomerular and tubular
damage.
Morphologically, one sees a selective necrosis in the pars recta
region, loss of brush border, (villi) from cells, with the
formation of clumps of membranes in the cellular cytoplasm,
vacuoles, distinct mitochondrial changes characteristic of
impending necrosis with eventual necrotic destruction.

9.4.1.2.1. EDTA Therapy

Short term lead intoxication is usually reversible with EDTA
(ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid) therapy. In the early 1950s
several deaths occurred from kidney toxicity after EDTA
treatment. At that time, the dosage used was around 10 grams
of EDTA per infusion, while it is now 3 grams.
EDTA kidney toxicity is related to the dose and the rate of
infusion, which must be adjusted so that the infusion will not
harm the kidney. If the patient is very elderly, has low
parathyroid activity or is suffering from heavy metal toxicity,
treatment should be modified to use less EDTA less frequently
(once per week). The heavy metals that damage the kidneys
during excessive infusion therapy are lead, aluminum,
cadmium, mercury, nickel, copper and arsenic.
Tests of renal function should be performed before chelation
therapy is started. In cases of renal impairment, lower EDTA
dosage is indicated, with sufficient periods of rest between the
infusions.
Long term exposure to lead may cause irreversible kidney
dysfunction. “Saturnism” is lead induced gout because of
increased uric acid levels.

9.4.1.4. Cr

Chromium produces proximal tubular damage with glucosuria,
but lower down than does Hg. Ischemic patches on the kidney
surface are suggestive of a vascular effect.
9.4.2. Ethylene Glycol
Ethylene glycol (car anti-freeze) is biotransformed both in the
liver and in the kidneys to oxalic acid, but the kidney is
particularly susceptible. Oxalic acid crystallizes in the lumen
and in the cells of the tubule into calcium
oxalate salt, leading to laceration of the
tubules. Leaves of rhubarb contain large
amounts of oxalate. Ethylene glycol
proceeds through a number of oxidative
reactions leading to acidosis (F9.8). The
final product, glyoxylic acid, can be
converted either into formic acid or oxalic acid. Oxalic acid
may react with calcium ions to produce insoluble crystals of
calcium oxalate which precipitate in the renal tubules,
eventually producing kidney "stones" and tubular epithelial
necrosis with lipid inclusions. Also visible, microscopically, is
a thickening of the basement membrane in the glomerulus
along with granular deposits.

9.4.1.3. Hg

Mercury is a classical nephrotoxin, used in experimental
models of kidney failure.
The damage is primarily in the pars recta of the proximal
tubule, with proliferation of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum
(SER) and extrusion of SER "packets". Organic acid secretion
(p-aminohippuric acid, PAH), predominantly in the pars recta,
is reduced by Hg exposure. The basic toxic action of Hg is
inhibition of the free sulphydryl groups (-SH) of enzymes.

100 deaths occurred in 1937 when ethylene glycol was used as a solvent for an oral
sulphanilamide pharmaceutical preparation. Within two days of consumption,
nausea, vomiting, intestinal cramps, diarrhea, and back pain in the region of the
kidneys were experienced. These initial symptoms led to progressive hepatic

Acute poisoning: brief polyuria may be followed by anuria. If
subject survives, polyuria follows, lasting many months.
9-10

necrosis, renal tubular degeneration and death. Substitution of ethylene glycol by
propylene glycol avoids all renal toxicity.

In addition to the renal effects, ethylene glycol has other target
organs: CNS (depression, initially), muscle paralysis (CNS
related), decreased tendon reflexes, convulsions and tetany
(due to hypocalcemia), pulmonary edema and congestive heart
failure.

Lavage and activated charcoal can be used in the upper
digestive tract to minimize absorption. The principal goal in
such poisoning is to correct the acidosis (administration of
bicarbonate), eliminate the unmetabolized ethylene glycol (by
hemodialysis), and to block further tissue biotransformation by
administering ethanol (20%) which will compete successfully
for the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase to block the formation
of glycoaldehyde. The ethanol should be administered within 8
hr of exposure in acute cases (ingestion) and be continued for
at least 5 days.

Ability to concentrate urine is often the last property to be
regained by the kidney after recovery from intoxication.
9.4.3. Organic Solvents
Carbon tetrachloride and chloroform act predominantly in the
proximal tubule. Carbon tetrachloride causes severe hepatic
necrosis, but the cause of death is kidney failure.
Renal tubular disease can be caused by a variety of volatile
organic solvents, most likely as a consequence of reabsorption
into the proximal tubule and biotransformation there into
reactive and toxic intermediates. Glomerular damage can also
be produced by such agents, a slow progressive disease with an
insidious onset seen in adults2,3.

9.5. Tests of Kidney Function
The general medical indicators of kidney function are Blood
Urea Nitrogen (catabolism of proteins, normal 2.9-7.1 mmol/l)
and serum creatinine levels (from muscle metabolism, 60-130
mol/l). Elevated levels in the serum are indicative of kidney
dysfunction, specifically low Glomerular Filtration Rate.
The basic test of kidney function is clearance. Clearance can
be higher or lower than the glomerular filtration rate if a
substance is actively secreted or reabsorbed, and is routinely
assessed by physicians to predict the rate of drug elimination in
patients. BUN and serum creatinine are related to GFR (F9.9).
F9.8. Ethylene glycol toxicity. Casarett & Doull.

9-11

9.5.1. Creatinine Clearance

F9.10. The
relation
between the
most
frequently
used medical
kidney
parameters
and the
glomerular
filtration rate.

The rate at which a drug is eliminated
by the kidneys is commonly
proportional to the clearance of
creatinine. It is not always convenient
before starting treatment to wait for a
creatinine (shown) clearance
measurement, but it can be estimated
by using the Siersbaek-Nielsen
nomogram to estimate creatinine clearance from weight, age,
and serum creatinine concentration (F9.9).

Casarett & Doull.

F9.9. Nomogram for rapid estimation of endogenous creatinine
clearance. Lilly.
With a straightedge, join
weight to age. Keep
straightedge at crossing
point of line marked "R."
Then move the righthand side of the
straightedge to the
appropriate serum creatinine
value and read the patient's
clearance from the left side
of the nomogram.

9.5.2. Glomerular Filtration Rate
The Glomerular Filtration Rate, in ml/min, evaluates the
volume of plasma being passed into Bowman’s capsule.
It is measured by administering a single injection if Inulin, a
fructose polymer with molecular weight of 5200 Da. This
sugar dissolves in the blood, but is not bound to any plasma
component, is not metabolized or stored, is not reabsorbed or
secreted. It becomes a permanent component of urine.
GFR  ml / min  

When kidney function
is stable, this gives a
valid estimate. But in
the presence of shock,
severe cardiac failure,
or oliguria, the estimate
is too high.

 IUrine   mg / dL  Urine Flow Rate ml / min


 I Plasma   mg / dL 

The numerator product is "mg excreted per minute", while the
denominator is the concentration found in plasma from the
injection. A normal GFR is about 125 ml/min.
If this decreases, there is a possibility of longer half-lives for
toxicants being eliminated, and consequently more toxicity.
Any significant renal disease or toxicity will affect the GFR, as
will hypotension or shock.

9-12

9.5.3. Tubular Secretion Rate
To evaluate the volume of plasma being passed through the
kidneys as a whole, one can use, in the same way, PAH
clearance.
P-Amino-Hippuric Acid is so
well secreted into the urine by the
tubules that about 91% of it is
eliminated from the whole plasma
present in the kidney in a single pass.
Normal values, compensated by 0.91, are 650 ml/min.

chamber. This system should provide improved control of
blood ions, particularly potassium, in dialysis patients.
9.5.5. In Vitro
Initial research on the efficacy and toxicity of drugs is often
conducted on cell lines that have been transformed, so that they
may proliferate indefinitely, insuring repeatability of the test.
Specific cell lines are used to simulate the proximal tubule
(LLC-PK1,pig), and the distal tubule (MDCK, dog). Most of
the current cell models cannot be used universally. Two
problems are loss of renal characteristics and limited lifespan.

9.5.4. Artificial kidneys
Dialysis machines remove toxins from
the blood through diffusion, but are not
specific and do not produce hormones
and enzymes.
Membranes made of cellulose readily
pass low molecular weight molecules
(urea, creatinine, uric acid,
electrolytes). Amino acids, vitamins,
glucose and water are also lost, and so
must be replenished.
A patient requires 3 sessions/week at 36 hours per session, during which 120
liters/week are filtered at a yearly cost
of about 25,000 $. By contrast, kidneys
cleanse 1200 l/week.
As a result, urea levels in artificial dialysis patients are 14-200
mg/100 ml blood compared to 20-40 mg/100 ml of blood for
normal individuals. Life expectance in middle-age is only 5
years on artificial kidneys.
In the future, a chamber could be used to grow kidney cells
from pigs, and a patient's blood made to interface with the

Renal continuous cell lines such as Human Embryonic Kidney
293 cells (HEK293) have been popular in pharmacology
screening. The cells, assumed to be from a kidney fibroblast,
endothelium or epithelium, were transformed in culture with
adenovirus in the early 1970s. But a 2002 study suggested that
HEK293 cells have many properties of immature neurons. The
suitability of HEK293 as an in vitro model for kidney cell
function was in question. When HEK293 was compared to
Human Renal Cortical Epithelial Cells and Human Renal
Epithelial Cells of more recent fabrication in their response to a
drug, Camptothecin, responses were very different.
Camptothecin induces apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner in
vitro. As can be seen in the figure below, the effective
concentration (EC50) of Camptothecin on HEK293, compared
to primary kidney cells in triggering apoptosis varies by a
factor of almost 10. This probably led in the past to the use of
lower and probably ineffective concentrations of drugs being
used in tests of efficacy and toxicity.

9-13

In the MSDSs, many of the ingredients listed did not add up to
100%, others were not specific as to their identity, and others
indicated only as solid acrylic, proprietary alcohol, bodying
agent. Many of these chemicals are taken into the body not
only via inhalation but through the intact skin. Many of them
are eliminated in the urine, contacting kidneys and bladder
cells.
James was 47 years old when he noticed blood in his urine.
Test showed cancer of his right kidney, and it was removed in
1982. He stopping smoked cigarettes at the time his kidney
cancer was diagnosed.
9.6.2. Kidney Case #2
Albert worked 24 years as a laborer at a company where lead
was handled on a regular basis, for over 40% of his total
lifetime. Lead is concentrated in the bones and excreted by the
kidneys. Kidney cells are damaged, resulting in decreased
ability to eliminate fluid and solute loads. While lead is stored
in the bones, it interferes with the body's ability to make blood
cells, producing anemia. Albert was admitted to the hospital
because of kidney failure and hypertension when he was 58
years old. He had been admitted twice before because of lead
poisoning, and within the previous month because of severe
anemia. Six days later he was dead, his final diagnosis being
chronic glomerulonephritis and uremia.

F9.11. Effect of Camptothecin on viability of primary (HRE & HRCE)
and continuous (HEK293) renal cells.

9.6. Short Kidney Cases
Modified from Sherman.
9.6.1. Kidney Case #1

9.6.3. Kidney Case #3

James smoked cigarettes, beginning at age 17. He operated an
antique car restoring business, handling a number of plastics,
paints, and solvents: toluol, xylol, acetone, isopropyl alcohol,
methylene chloride, ethylene glycol monoethyl ether,
methoxyethyl acetate, acrylic paint systems, and a number of
chemicals identified only as petroleum distillates, aromatic
hydrocarbons, and aliphatic hydrocarbons.

David, a non-smoking police officer, was medically evaluated
in January 1982. An Intravenous Pyelogram showed no
abnormalities of his kidneys or bladder. In March 1984, David
crashed into a utility pole in the automobile chase of a suspect.
His patrol car and an electrical transformer exploded and
burned. He was heavily exposed to the fumes and smoke.
PCBs used as coolants in many older electrical transformers
may be contaminated with dioxins (TCDD), potentially causing
9-14

9.6.5. Kidney Case #5

malignancies. Even brief exposures have consequences, as
PCBs have a long half-life within the body. By September
1984, he noticed blood in his urine. In January 1985 he had
bladder cancer at 39 years old, and underwent surgical removal
of the malignancy. Bladder cancer is rare at 39 years, and
police duty does not involve exposure to toxic chemicals. With
a baseline of no disease in 1982, exposure in 1984, and the
development of a malignancy ten months later, a cause-andeffect relationship is highly likely. This sort of documentation
is rare, in that few people have a body system evaluated twice
within such a short time, with the appearance of cancer during
the interval.

Charles worked as a welder after finishing high school. He did
aluminum welding, and then silver brazing for the next 16
years, followed by electric welding for the last 2 years.
The brazing material's MSDS indicated: silver 50%, copper
15.5%, zinc oxide 16.5%, and cadmium oxide 18%. The
product was "dangerous mostly from cadmium fumes.
Inhalation of dusts or fumes of cadmium affects the respiratory
tract and may affect the kidneys. Cadmium is listed by the
National Toxicology Program as anticipated to be a
carcinogen. Studies indicate that there is an increased incidence
of prostatic cancer, and possibly kidney and respiratory cancer
in cadmium workers."
The MSDS recommends respiratory protection. At 37 years
old, Charles applied for life insurance. A routine examination
found protein in his urine and kidney dysfunction. Biopsy
revealed a focal sclerosing glomerulosclerosis, labeled as
nonspecific. As an incidental finding, he had reported that he
had essentially lost his sense of smell ten years previously.

9.6.4. Kidney Case #4
Harry worked for 32 years buffing chrome-plated bumpers. He
used a dry buffing compound and said that although it was
extremely dusty work, he did not wear any sort of mask until
after 1978. He said the bumpers were plated in an area about
100 m away from his workstation, and that the fumes and the
acids “cut his wind”, especially when equipment broke down.
Exposure to chromium is associated with lung disease and
kidney damage. Chromium compounds are taken into the body
via inhalation, by ingestion with the saliva, and through the
skin, causing damage at a number of sites. Chromium is
excreted in the urine, and causes damage as it passes through
the kidneys.
He first learned of high blood pressure and diabetes in 1967,
and he took medication for each.
Harry is now 60 years old. His blood pressure readings are
250/130 on the right, and 240/142 on the left, and he has
significant protein in his urine.

9.7. Case Study: Acute Arsine Poisoning
(modified from Williams & Burson)
A patient was admitted with what seemed to be hemolysis. The hospital also
reported that a fellow employee of the patient had become ill at about the same time
and had been admitted to another hospital. A visit to the plant where both employees
worked was organized. The concern was that other workers might have been
exposed as well.
It was learned at the plant that the two ill employees had worked at cleaning a room
on the preceding day. There had been a clogged floor drain in this room, and the
workers used a drain cleaner that was one of the commercial products manufactured
by the company. Once in the drain, the cleaner had bubbled and given off a gas with
a pungent odor. Even though the employees developed headaches, they continued at
their work for about four hours.
At home that night, the employees had become ill. They were nauseated, and
vomited. One went to a hospital emergency room, was examined, and was sent
home. The other went to another emergency room; his urine was sampled and it was
bloody looking; he was admitted to the hospital. The first worker became

9-15

progressively worse and was admitted to a hospital the next day. In the meantime it
was determined in the hospitals that both workers had severe hemolysis, which
caused the bloody-looking urine. The only gas that will cause hemolysis is arsine.
One of the necessary ingredients for the production of arsine is arsenic. The plant
was therefore inspected for potential sources of arsenic, and samples from the floor
drain were collected and analyzed. All the samples were analyzed by neutron
activation analysis, which is somewhat expensive but is a relatively easy way to
analyze multiple matrices. In addition, urine and blood from the two patients, the
drain cleaner, and air samples were also submitted for analysis.
The plant consisted of a large work area and several offices. There were two loading
docks, one small and the other large. One room was used for mixing the different
products made there. In another area workers bagged products. The stopped-up floor
drain from which the gases had bubbled was in the center of this area. The loading
dock outside this room was higher than the floor of the room; when it rained, water
on the loading dock would run into the building. The manager of the plant had
worked there for only a few years and was unaware of any arsenic ever having been
used in the plant. However, one of the maintenance men told investigators that
before its present operation, the company had made arsenical herbicides, primarily
arsenic trioxide; in fact, a tank located outside on the loading dock had previously
been used for mixing arsenical herbicides. When the employees were conducting
their general cleanup, they thought only water was in this tank and had drained it;
the contents drained into the stopped-up drain. When the employees added their
company's drain-cleaning product, primarily a mixture of sodium hydroxide,
aluminum chips, and sodium, the gas had been emitted from the drain. Clearly the
water and arsenic trioxide from the forgotten mixing tank had reacted to produce the
gas arsine, as follows:
6 NaOH + 6 Al + 6 H20 + As2O3

>

urine than some of their fellow workers who had been in the vicinity of the drain but
who had not gotten sick. A supervisor, who had never gone into the area where the
drain was, showed no arsenic in his urine. It was concluded that the presence of
arsenic in the drain resulted in the formation of arsine when the drain cleaner was
added. The arsine gas caused the hemolysis in the patients.
The two patients, after a very stormy medical course including renal failure and
other problems, finally recovered, partly because such cases can now be treated with
dialysis units. Before dialysis units were available patients with severe arsine
poisoning usually died of renal failure. There are two effects of arsine poisoning on
the kidneys. One is the breakdown of the red blood cells with excretion of
hemoglobin, which will damage the kidneys; in addition, arsine itself may directly
damage the kidneys. Both employees had to be dialyzed for several weeks.
T9.12. Arsenic and Antimony Levels in Environmental Samples
Gathered at the Chemical Plant Where Arsine Poisoning Occurred
Concentration (ppm)
Arsenic
Antimony

Source
Drain
Upper fraction
Liquid
Solid
Lower fraction
Liquid
Solid
Air sample
Abandoned herbicide tank
With agitation
Before
After

6 NaAlO2 + 3 H2O + 2 AsH3

Arsine is extremely toxic. Arsine poisoning does not reveal itself in elevated arsenic
levels in those patients who have been poisoned by arsine; it does not produce the
same type of symptomatology as arsenic poisoning. Indeed, arsenic poisoning is
entirely different from arsine poisoning.
The most important consideration was to demonstrate that arsenic was present in the
drain, that an arsenic-to-arsine reaction could have taken place, and that there was
arsine in the gas the employees had inhaled. Drain samples from the herbicide tank,
samples from the drain cleaner, and the aluminum chips were all tested for arsenic.
As shown in the Table, there was a great deal of arsenic, comparatively speaking, in
the drain and in the herbicide tank. There was also some antimony. If antimony were
substituted for arsenic in the reaction shown above, the result would be formation of
stibene. However, stibene is not as stable as arsine, and it is highly unlikely that it
would have caused the illness in the patients. The drain cleaner and the aluminum
chips had no arsenic. Analysis of the urine from a number of other workers
demonstrated that the two people who were ill had higher arsenic levels in their

440
970

44
55

410
4,460
l3µg

43
170

7,490
11,400

393
698

Drain cleaner
NaOH and NaNO3 solid
0.26
1.0
Aluminum chips
0.15
40.0
*Forty liters obtained on charcoal tubes minus background from unused tube

9.8. Bangladesh and Arsenic (National
Geographic, 2002)

Because surface water had bacterial contamination, 12 million
wells were dug in Bangladesh to minimize infection in the
water supply.

9-16

Unfortunately, high levels of
arsenic from the deeper wells has
caused 7000 deaths since the
early 1990s.
After 8-14 years, white or black
spots (melanosis, see at left)
appear on the skin (palms and
soles), leading to gangrenous
ulcers. Finally, renal diseases and
cancers of lungs and bladder
appear. It appears that arsenic
attached to sedimentary grains is
released in deep groundwater in
great part by bacteria4.
More than 10 micrograms per
liter of the poisonous element
were associated with an elevated

risk of all-cause mortality6,7.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) signaled on
October 31, 2001 that it will be reducing the amount of arsenic
allowed in U.S. drinking water from a maximum of 50
micrograms per liter to the tighter 10 micrograms per liter.
REFERENCES

1. The relationship between Itai-Itai disease among inhabitants of the Jinzu River basin and cadmium in rice. Nogawa,
K. et al. Toxicol. Letters 17, 263-266, 1983.
2. Membranous nephropathy following exposure to volatile hydrocarbons. Ehrenreich, T. et al. Environ. Res. 14, 35-45,
1977.
3. Nephron Number in Patients with Primary Hypertension, Gunhild Keller et al. N Engl J Med, Vol 348:101-108, January
9, 2003.
4. Role of metal-reducing bacteria in arsenic release from Bengal delta sediments. Islam, F.S et al. Nature 430 (July
1):68-71. 2004
5. Estrogen-like activity of metals in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Martin MB et al. Endocrinology 144, 2425-2436, 2003.
6. Arsenic exposure from drinking water, and all-cause and chronic-disease mortalities in Bangladesh (HEALS): a
prospective cohort study. Argos M et al. Lancet 2010; DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60481-3.
7. Arsenic-related mortality in Bangladesh. Karagas MR. Lancet 2010; DOI:10.1016/ S0140-6736(10)61002-1.
8.Potential Health Risks to DOD Firing-Range Personnel from Recurrent Lead Exposure. National Research Council of
the National Academies, The National Academies Press. 2012. [Cited 2012 Dec 5]. Available from:
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=18249#toc

9-17

10.2.12. Other Types of Tests . 22
10.3. Human Tests . 22
10.3.1. Clinical Tests . 22
10.3.1.1. Phase I: (10 M$, 1.5 years) . 22
10.3.1.2. Phase II: (20 M$, 2 years) . 23
10.3.1.3. Phase III: (45 M$, 3.5 years). 23
10.3.2. Philosophical Questions on Clinical Testing . 24
10.3.2.1. Use of human subjects . 24
10.3.2.2. Breath of testing . 24
10.3.2.3. Performance of Testing . 24
10.3.2.4. Conflict of interest . 24
10.4. In Vitro Models. 24
10.4.1. Diversity of Cells . 25
10.4.2. Obtaining Cell Suspensions . 25
10.4.3. Selecting from the Cell Suspension . 25
10.4.4. Normal Cells vs Cancer Cells . 26
10.4.5. Stem Cells . 26
10.4.6. Primary Cultures . 26
10.4.7. Cell Lines . 27
10.4.8. Cell Line Fidelity . 27
10.4.9. Cell Culture Medium . 28
10.4.10. Determining Test Doses for In Vitro Systems . 28
10.4.11. Toxicokinetic Characteristics In Vitro . 29
10.4.12. Testing Techniques . 29
10.4.12.1. Multi-Well Test Techniques . 30
10.4.12.2. Fluorescence-activated cell-sorting . 30
10.4.13. Implementation of Cytotoxicity Testing . 31
10.4.13.1. Direct Contact and Agar Overlay . 31
10.4.13.2. Minimum Essential Medium Elution and End
Point Titration . 32
10.4.13.3. Alterations in Cell Growth . 32
10.4.14. Advanced Applications of Cell Culture in
Toxicology . 33

10.1. Selection of Experimental Technique . 2
10.1.1. Choice of a test system.2
10.1.1.1. Model Problems .3
10.1.1.2. Model Cost .4
10.1.2. Choice of a Response .4
10.1.3. Duration of the test .4
10.1.4. Dosages to be tested .4
10.1.5. Test Control . 4
10.1.5.1. Reproducibility vs Representativity .4
10.1.5.2. Standardization of Methods . 6
10.1.6. Ethics . 6
10.2. In Vivo Models . 7
10.2.1. Species Selection .7
10.2.2. Sex Bias . 12
10.2.3. Mouse Strains . 12
10.2.4. Standardized Rats . 12
10.2.5. Genetically Modified Animals . 13
10.2.5.1. Transgenic Mice. 13
10.2.5.2. Knockout Animals . 14
10.2.6. Classic Types of Animal Tests . 16
10.2.7. Acute Tests . 16
10.2.8. Acute Toxicity Test Techniques . 17
10.2.8.1. Classic LD50 (Trevan, 1927) . 17
10.2.8.2. Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) Test Guideline 401 (1987). 17
10.2.8.3. Up & Down . 17
10.2.8.4. Limit Test . 17
10.2.9. Subchronic Tests. 18
10.2.10. Chronic Tests . 19
10.2.11. Carcinogenicity Tests . 21
10-1

T10.1. The Classic Models used by Biologists
Formal Name
Description

10.

Escherichia coli
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Schizosaccharomyces pombe
Caenorhabditis elegans
Drosophila melanogaster
Danio rerio
Arabidopsis thaliana
Mus musculus

Toxicity determinations are influenced by our choice of
toxicity models, and by our choice of variables used to assess
these models.

10.1. Selection of Experimental
Technique
To experimentally determine
toxicity, a model as well as
investigation methods must be
chosen. These specific choices have
a critical influence on outcomes.
When general toxicity is the intended
determination of the test, these
choices, which by necessity use a
specific models and investigation
techniques, are powerful
determinants of toxicity, essentially
by possibly excluding other aspects
of toxicity from consideration.

Intestinal bacterium
Yeasts, single nucleated cells
Small soil-dwelling worm
Fruit fly
Zebrafish
Mustard plant family
Mouse

Drosophila rose to prominence in the early 1900s because of
its short generation time and large chromosomes. Although the
fruit fly encodes about 14,000 proteins and humans almost
twice that number, many proteins accomplish the same tasks in
both organisms. When human disease genes are put in flies,
they often cause similar symptoms. Addition of a human gene
in a fly can compensate for the deletion of the same gene from
the fly.
The zebra fish is also also an old environmental toxicology
model for organ toxicity, developmental toxicity and acute
toxicity (LC50). You can see through zebra fish, so necrosis and
changes in organ morphology can be seen under a dissecting
microscope. Embryos are transparent enough for observation of

10.1.1. Choice of a test system
Test systems are chosen to facilitate investigations, and make
them as productive and economical as possible. For example,
biologists use a set of models (T10.1) somewhat different from
those of toxicologists, because their interests are directed
towards basic life mechanisms, rather than toxicity.
Intestinal bacteria, yeast and mice are familiar and accessible.
The C. Elegans worm was convenient for microscopy,
developed rapidly and had a short generation time.
10-2

the heartbeat (cardiotoxicity). Neurotoxicity has been studied
using staining antibodies. It has been used to study fetal
alcoohol syndrome and teratogenicity.

10.1.1.1. Model Problems

It is difficult to determine that a model properly represents
what it is intended to, and the foldback position is to use a
traditional model that is heavily represented in the literature.
Funding agencies dominated by sceptical colleagues support
work on a shortlist of favoured species, and as a consequence,
research on life revolves around a handful of species, under the
assumption that model organisms offer universal insights. This
undue focus comes with a much reduced field of view.

Arabidopsis thaliana has a short life cycle (6 weeks), seed
production is prolific and the plant is easily cultivated in
restricted space. The use of frogs (Xenopus laevis) in
pregnancy testsfor led to their recruitment as a model
for developmental research.
Models used in toxicology include an even larger range of
organisms than in biology, partly because many organ diseases
must be represented: hematotoxicity, cardiotoxicity,
gastrointestinal toxicity, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity,
ototoxicity, bladder toxicity, neurotoxicity, pulmonary toxicity,
endocrine toxicity and reproductive toxicity. Each of these
organ systems is easiest to observe in specific models.
Therefore, bacteria, algae, cell lines, tissue culture, mice, rats,
rabbits and primates are all part of the experimental models
used in toxicology. Worms can be used instead of rodents for
lethality (LD50) testing. The digestive system is very similar in
structure to worms.

The lack of developmental plasticity in
Drosophila and of genetic variability in
inbred rats limit what these models can
tell us19. Although the mouse and human
genome are about 85% identical, the
remaining 15% difference can introduce
substantial variations in toxicity reactions, because so many
elements of livings systems are functionally bound together.
Rats replicate high blood pressure and atherosclerosis more
readily than mice do. Rabbits are closer to humans,
physiologically, than either mice or rats. Genetically, dogs are
much closer to humans than rats. However, dogs are more
susceptible than humans to certain foods, for example, alcohol,
coffee, chocolate, macadamia nuts, garlic, onions and grapes.
Although the dog split off first from the common ancestor, the
rat experienced a much higher mutation rate.

In a collection of critical studies on the toxicity of benzene
applicable to humans, the following models were used: mouse
(15), rat (10), human (8), rabbit (5), dog (2) and one study each
in cat, guinea pig and frog. Rats are a preferred model for
studies of the heart, kidneys, immune system, reproductive
system and nervous system.
In the future, in vitro proteomics and genomics may become
popular, as cellular or molecular endpoints appropriate for high
throughput toxicity screening are developed.

In animal models, factors such as gender, age, nutritional and
disease state, time of exposure, daily rhythms of cortisol and
melatonin, and the general environment may all affect test
results.
Researchers generally tend to gloss over the weakness of their
models.

10-3

Thalidomide, a sedative drug tested with good results in the
late 50s to treat morning sickness associated with pregnancy,
unexpectedly produced amelia and phocomelia in humans.
Mice and rats are resistant to it; hamsters and rabbits show
variable effects.

reliably. The selection of the response variable is probably the
most under-played aspect of toxicity testing.
10.1.3. Duration of the test
Eye irritation may only take a few seconds to apply and as little
as a day to interpret. Reproductive and carcinogenicity tests
take years. The most basic classification of toxicity tests refers
to duration (acute vs chronic).

10.1.1.2. Model Cost

The choice of test system strongly influences the price of the
test. Prices for relatively inexpensive biocompatibility tests are
compiled in T10.2, while prices ($) for more ambitious studies
in the rat are shown below.

10.1.4. Dosages to be tested
To anticipate the appropriate dosages, something must be
known about the toxicity of the agent tested. The dosage is
usually in mg/kg, as opposed to the more exact scaling
according to Weight 0.66-0.75. The dosages are displayed on a log
scale, usually in multiples of 3, 5, or 10. Attempt is made to
cover the dosage range with a reasonable number of groups
that will include effective or lethal doses, as well as the
threshold dose.

A Balb/c mouse is less that 20 $, but a cat, which makes a good
models for allergy studies, costs 800 $. A beagle is around 700
$, but if the animal has a defined antibody profile, it might cost
1500 $. A monkey that is specific pathogen free might go for
8000 $.
Acute inhalation toxicity test
10,000
Repeated dose test: 14-day exposure
50,000
Reproductive toxicity test
100,000
Repeated dose test: 90-day exposure
120,000
Repeated dose test: 1-year exposure (dietary intake) 250,000
Repeated dose test: 1-year exposure (forced feeding) 1,000,000

10.1.5. Test Control
10.1.5.1. Reproducibility vs Representativity

Within the test procedure specification lies a decision between
the value of Reproducibility vs Representativity. The more
heavily controlled a test is in terms of the organism used,
husbandry and environmental variables, the more restricted it is
in the conditions that it represents. In general, investigators are
more concerned about Reproducibility of results than about
Representativity because Reproducibility is easier to prove.

In view of the costs associated with experiments, it is often
relevant to consider the minimum testing required, as opposed
to what would ideally be needed.
10.1.2. Choice of a Response

For example, it is easier to purchase rats with identical genetic
makeup and control completely their food and environmental
conditions than it is to insure that this particular test will
properly represent human safety, which should involve a rich
array of possible conditions (age, sex, social, environmental,
medical), all of which are costly to simulate.

The end-point of the study should be easily observable and
quantifiable. Cell counting, bio-chemical product
determination, cell morphology, tumor count, changes in
weight gain.can all be considered, as long as they can be done

10-4

instability (because of complexity) in any living system. Our
knowledge base and our
illustrations of living systems tend to under-estimate true
natural complexity. As a consequence, experiments intended to
be carefully controlled sometimes yield diffuse results.
For example, genetically identical mice raised as far as possible
in the same environment show significant variability in life
spans6. A common fear of experimenters is to end up with
ambiguous data that is difficult or impossible to interpret.
Any "realistic" toxicological representation includes an array of
conditions so complex that the smearing out effect on the data
risks making the results unintelligible. Therefore, such
simulations are rarely attempted and are left for
epidemiologists to extract from human populations.

T10.2. Cost in US $ of Biocompatibility Tests (Nelson Labs).
CATEGORY
Characterization
(non-GLP)
Cytotoxicity
Sensitization

Irritation

Systemic
Toxicity
Sub-chronic
Toxicity
Genotoxicity

Implantation w/
Histopathology

Hemo
compatibility

TESTING OPTIONS
Differential Scanning
Colorimetry
Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR)

COST
$115 w/o GLP

TIME
10 days

$95 w/o GLP

7 days

MEM Elution (USP)
Agar Overlay (USP)
Magnusson-Kligman Method
(ISO) with 2 extracts

$360
$360
$4635-6725

15 days
15 days
6-8 weeks

Buehler Method

$3600-4225

6-8 weeks

Intracutaneous Reactivity
(ISO) with 2 extracts

$750-870

3-4 weeks

Primary Skin Irritation (ISO)

$540-775

3-4 weeks

Primary Eye Irritation (ISO)
USP/ISO Systemic Injection
with 2 extracts
Material Mediated Pyrogen

$640-810
$350-545

3-4 weeks
3-4 weeks

$425-635

2-4 weeks

Intraperitoneal Toxicity
w/Histopathology
Intravenous Toxicity
w/Histopathology
Ames Test w/ 2 extracts
Mouse Micronucleus (ISO)
Chromosomal Aberration (ISO)

$5625-9645

6-8 weeks

$5625-9600

6-8 weeks

$2250
$8700-10890
$8800-10850

5 weeks
8-10 weeks
8-10 weeks

7 Day Observation (ISO)
14 Day Observation (ISO)
30 Day Observation (ISO)
60 Day Observation (ISO)
90 Day Observation (ISO)
Dog Thrombogenicity (ISO)
Hemolysis
Partial Thromboplastin Time
(PTT Non-Activated)
Prothrombin Time (PT)
Immunology/Complement
(C3a, SCb-9)

$1350-1875
$1525-1925
$1600-2100
$2155-2575
$2750-2975
$3800-3965
$565
$550

5-6 weeks
6-8 weeks
8-10 weeks
17 weeks
19 weeks
6-8 weeks
2 weeks
3 weeks

$550
$2450

3 weeks
4 weeks

SAMPLE
1 gram

120 sq cm or
4 grams
600 sq cm or
32 grams
(min. 6 samples)
125, 1"X1"
pieces or 45
grams
240 sq cm or
8 grams
120 sq cm or
4 grams
240 sq cm or
8 grams
600 sq cm or
30 grams
1900 sq cm or
100 grams

T10.3. The US Good Laboratory Practices provide guidelines for
conducting nonclinical laboratory studies. (21 CFR Part 58, effective
April 1st 1997) http://www.nal.usda.gov/awic/legislat/21cfr97.htm

240 sq cm or
8 grams
240 sq cm or
12 grams
14, 1 x 10mm
strips

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

6, 2 inch long &
< 3mm diam.
150 sq cm or 5
grams
120 sq cm or
4 grams

It would require many independent experiments performed on
a number of different species and under many different
conditions to raise confidence in Representativity, which drives
the costs much higher.
Therefore, toxicologists attempt to achieve Reproducibility in
individual tests, and to attain Representativity by compiling a
number of diverse experiments. It should be realized that for
many important biological variables, there is an inherent

General Provisions
Organization and Personnel
Facilities
Equipment
Testing Facilities Operation
Test and Control Articles
Protocol and Conduct of a Non-Clinical Laboratory Study
Records and Reports
Disqualification of Testing Facilities

Sections within each of these parts identify procedures to which
laboratories must comply. Compliance is monitored by the FDA with
audits every 2 years, verifying Standard Operating Procedures, study
data (in-life data, necropsy, clinical pathology data, histology/pathology
worksheets, tables, statistics, final reports, computer validation, training
records, etc.).

10-5

10.1.6. Ethics
Using surrogates species for testing is based first on the
principle that humans are more valuable than other species. We
wish to protect ourselves from injury even if it means injury to
other species, because we have less in common with them than
with other humans.

10.1.5.2. Standardization of Methods

Over the past three decades, toxicological assessment protocols
have evolved into complex tests of a variety of endpoints of
toxicity. Considering toxicity methods, one can wonder
about the value of protocol diversity as opposed to protocol
standardization. Advantages can stem from both, but they are
to a point incompatible. Diversity leads to discoveries, while
standardization leads to comparability.
With standardization comes bureaucracy. The US FDA and
other national and international bodies have led protocols to
become highly formalized, and consequently expensive.
If all the research done in the past had been done according to
Good Laboratory Practices (F10.3), this text might be written
with a quill, rather than a computer…
GLP keeps track of everything through reporting, even the
trivial, absorbing precious resources. GLP also leads to an
effective monopoly on research for rich corporations or
governments by disabling small laboratories, or at least taking
funding away from them.
Contrasting study styles can influence conclusions. For
example, in assessing the bioeffects of bisphenol A, the US
FDA relied mostly on industry GLP studies, while the US
National Toxicology Program relied on studies performed by
university scientists. The two procedures yielded different
conclusions (“little or no risk” vs “some concern”).

> Criticism: All species are “equal”. Genetic programs differ,
but none is inherently more valuable than another. Our
anthropomorphic view is an abuse of other (“lower”) life
forms.
The quest for knowledge is a second principle supporting
testing. Experimentation that leads to improved knowledge,
whether done on animals or humans, will benefit countless
other humans in the future.
> Criticism: We injure the few to
save the mass, which is contrary
to individual rights. This happens
to some extent in clinical trials.
But in the end, we go ahead with
testing mostly because we have
acquired through technology a
position of power on our
planet…a power that we should
not abuse.

The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
has also published “Good Laboratory Practices” but in this case
specifying which toxicology tests should be run on any given
chemical (cosmetic, pesticide, solvent). Note that in practice,
this acts to restrict as much as it does to require testing.
There are also Good Clinical Practices (GCP) for clinical
studies. Generally, this bureaucracy seriously increases the
price of science.

F10.4. A PETA poster depicting the
sadistic scientist.

A naïve suggestion to "use
computers" for toxicity testing is
10-6

irrelevant. If we could program computers with an accurate
description of living systems useful for toxicity testing, we
would have such knowledge that there would be no need to test
in the first place.
Short of testing on humans, which is done in clinical trials, we
use the most primitive and inexpensive surrogate that will do
the job.
Contrary to what some extremists would like you to think
(F10.4), sadists are not common in science laboratories.
But there are tired, resource-strapped people who may cut
corners. Ethics committees are active to insure that
unnecessary pain is not inflicted on experimental animals.

From the first column, evidence in humans is sufficient to
establish carcinogenicity in 6% (total) of chemicals. But 42%
of those (2.5 / 6) did not provide corresponding Sufficient
animal evidence. From the first line, 34% of the 597 chemicals
show sufficient evidence in animals. Only 10.3% (3.5/34) of
those agents also proved to be human carcinogens. This is due
in great part to lack of human toxicological data. The
conclusion is that animal experiments are modestly predictive
of human carcinogenicity, but that lack of adequate human data
is an even more serious problem.
10.2.1. Species Selection
Since toxic responses frequently differ between species, multispecies testing has been included in many official protocols
(T10.6) after the 1940s. Present requirement for rodent and
non-rodent might suggest the existence of two large categories
of animals in toxicity responses, but there is no special
similarity between rodents as opposed to non-rodents.
The requirement for non-rodents prevents undue concentration
on rodents, just because they are inexpensive. Not long ago, if
the toxicology results from two species diverged, a third
species was recommended, the monkey. This is now
abandoned in favor of fundamental studies: specific receptors,
toxicokinetics, and metabolic studies with in vitro models.
Once the cause of the divergence is known, directed
investigations are conducted in humans. In practice, studies in
a second species are most useful to stop the development of a
drug, since a repeat problem implies a small chance that
humans would be somehow be spared.

Lay people assessing scientific research often harbor
misconceptions, particularly under-estimating the effort
required to achieve discoveries. The labs presented in popular
films are lavishly equipped, with lots of redundant staff.

10.2. In Vivo Models
Animals models are useful to unravel mechanisms of action
and uncover potential effects, but are weak when attempting to
predict impacts on humans.
The correspondence between carcinogenicity determinations in
humans and animals can be evaluated using databases that list
carcinogenicity to humans and animals for a given chemical.
T10.5. Evidence of Animal vs Human Carcinogenicity
for 597 chemicals (IARC database), in%
Sufficient
Limited
Inadequate
No data
Human Total

Sufficient

Limited

Inadequate

No data

Animal Total

3.5
1.3
1.0
0.2
6

2
0.2
0.2
0
2.4

7.9
4.7
5.5
0.2
18.3

20.6
20.8
27.5
4.0
72.0

34
27
34.2
4.4
~100

Even a superficial examination of anatomical differences
between possible in vivo models (next 2 pages, from Ultimate
Visual Dictionary of Science) should alert us to many
differences these models have with humans, making the choice
of a particular animal model a very strategic decision.
10-7

The changes in use of various animal species for research and
toxicology testing is affected by availability of research funds
and ethical concerns (T10.7). There has been a substantial
move towards fish, which humans identify less with.

Many large corporations have their own closed rodent colonies,
leading to some uncertainty as to whether all tests on "rats", for
example, are truly comparable. In one view, chemicals should
be tested in the same strain, age, and sex of animals, so that
comparisons can be made. Companies like ICI, Eastman

It would be rational to investigate interspecies differences
questions and interpret divergent
findings before larger studies are
performed, but for practical reasons,
this is rarely done.

10-8

10-9

Organic Chemicals, Dow Chemical and Dupont have their own
in-house testing facilities and closed colonies of test animals.
However, there are many other companies providing data for
their products via contracted research establishments using
"white laboratory" mice or rats of various origins.
T10.6. Historic Evolution of animal species required for toxicity testing.

FDA/AMA
1943
FDA
1963
ESSDT
1965
PMA
1977

EEC
1983
FDA-Level
1 2000
FDA-Level
2 2000
FDA-Level
3
2000

Acute
Toxicity
Three or
more
Four, one
non-rodent
Three or
more,
including rat
& dog

Sub-Acute
Toxicity

Chronic
Toxicity

One or more

Three or more

Two, one nonrodent

Two, one nonrodent

Two, usually rat
& dog

Two, usually rat
& dog

Three or
more, one
non-rodent

Two or more, one
non-rodent,
usually rat &
beagle dog

Two or
more. If no
sex diff. in
first, 1 sex
only in 2nd

Two or more,
rodent & nonrodent, or selected
on similarity to
man

Two or more,
one non-rodent,
usually rat &
beagle dog
Two or more,
rodent & nonrodent, or
selected on
similarity to
man

1 rodent

Unspecified

1 rodent

rodent & nonrodent

1 rodent

1 rodent

1 non-rodent

rodent & nonrodent

T10.7. Changes in species used in toxicity testing.

The reproducibility of results from the single animal type is
then lost. As a result, the LD50 is often presented as a range,
e.g. 335-1050 mg/kg (mouse). This usually indicates that two
or more experimentally determined values using different
strains of either mice or rats were conducted, making it more
difficult to define toxicity precisely, but easier to appreciate its
range.
The LD50 reported typically have no notation concerning strain,
age, and sex of the species used.

European Society for the Study of Drug Toxicity / Pharmaceutical Manufacturer’s
Association / European Economic Community / Food and Drug Administration

10-10

But fundamental interspecies differences do occur occasionally
(TF10.9), leading to false positives or negatives from animal
models: alpha 2u-globulin, for example, is specific to male rats.
Tubular hypertrophy and regeneration is specific to alpha 2uglobulin and is not relevant to humans.

F10.8. 2000 Great Britain Scientific Procedures on Living Animals.
Categories
Total number of procedures on animals
Total number of individual animals used
Procedures on cats
-in respiratory & cardiovascular research
-in nervous system or special senses research
-in toxicity tests
Number of individual cats
Procedures on primates
-in toxicity tests
-in nervous or special senses research
-in respiratory or cardiovascular research
Number of individual primates
Procedures on dogs (beagles: 6,872; others including
crossbreds:760)
-in respiratory & cardiovascular research
-in toxicity tests
Number of individual dogs
Procedures on mice (59% of total)
Procedures on amphibians
Procedures on rabbits
Procedures on birds
Procedures on horses, donkeys or crossbreds
Procedures on fish
Procedures using transgenic animals
Procedures using animals with a harmful genetic
defect

2,714,726
2,642,993
1,813
1
294
195
613
3,690
2,563
514
224
2,951
7,632

Change
Since 1999
UP 2%
UP 3%
UP 12%
DOWN 95%
SAME
DOWN 29%
DOWN 10%
DOWN 8%
DOWN 6%
DOWN 27%
DOWN 36%
DOWN 7%
DOWN 7%

1,300
3,956
4,745
1,606,962
15,574
39,683
124,209
9,272
243,019
581,740
256,937

UP 1%
DOWN 24%
DOWN 20%
DOWN 2%
UP 7%
DOWN 4%
UP 17%
DOWN 1%
UP 98%
UP 14%
UP 2%

Numbers

AGENTS

CANCER

Ethylene bisdithiocarbamate
Fungicides
Amitrol
Goitrogens
Sulfamethazine

Thyroid
gland
tumors

Unleaded gasoline
1,4-Dichlorobenzene
D-Limonene
Isophorons
Dimethylmethylphosphonate
Perchloroethylene
Pentachloroethane
Hexachloroethane

Renal
tumors

T10.9. Rat tests can be irrelevant to
human health. Modified from Casarett & Doull

In the pharmaceutical industry, drug-target validation and
preclinical drug development are performed almost exclusively
using inbred mice and rats. This affords substantial savings by
increasing data reproducibility because of the small genetic
heterogeneity of the animals. However, these savings may be
offset by failed clinical trials, sometimes reflecting the
inadequacy of inbred animals to model genetic variations in
humans. The solution could include using mouse strains
closely related to wild mice and, in the future, comparative
genomics of the drug targets in humans and mice.

F10.10. Positive Response for
Carcinogenicity in Rats and Mice for
Selected Target Sites. Zbinden.

The choice of animal model can be
critical: there is only 70% correlation
in general carcinogenicity between
rat and mouse.
By target site, the situation is even
10-11

SPECIFICITY
Rats show decreased
thyroid hormone half-life,
increased thyroid
stimulating hormone level.
Humans have thyroidbinding protein, and so
develop no tumors.
Male Rats: chemicals bind to
a2u-globulin, which
accumulates in kidney cells,
leading to necrosis,
regenerative hyperplasia, renal
tubular calcification,
neoplasia.
Female Rats and Humans: do
not have a2u-globulin, and so
develop no tumors.

worse (F10.10).
Observation implies that differences between species are
mostly quantitatively based on toxicokinetics in uptake,
distribution, metabolism and clearance, rather than on
fundamental differences.

point mutations on the mouse genome. In 1962,
the nude mouse, without a thymus and lacking
T- and B-cells, was used to study human tumor
xenografts (implantation of human tumors into mice). The late
70s and 80s brought recombinant DNA techniques to create
transgenic mice, and later more than 1000 types of knockout
mice (where a specific gene is silenced).

10.2.2. Sex Bias
Sex biases are based on practical concerns.
Males are larger, (easier to attach and implant things into) and
do not have estrous cycles (that complicate pharmacology).
Females are easier to handle, smaller (drug saving) and
cheaper. They are preferred in dermatology because they fight
less, simplifying skin observations (wounds and scars).

In some cases, mouse models do not sustain close scrutiny. A
favorite model in which to study ras-associated cancers has
been the mouse. However, it has recently been found that rasassociated cancers are triggered by different pathways in mice
and humans, rendering two decades of work useless5.

Concentrating on one sex can be viewed as an advantage
because it builds a larger database on a single target.
A stronger bias than the sex bias is the bias against children. It
is not seen as ethical to experiment on them. So children are
viewed as small adults, although their metabolism is different.

Specific animal models can be examined using genetic
techniques to reveal the molecular details of, for example,
cancer. However, for breast cancer alone, there are at least 100
animal tumor models in use. Investigating them in detail will
take considerable time.

10.2.3. Mouse Strains
90% of research mammals are mice, because of their small
size, quick breeding and easily discernible variations.
Mouse research started in the early 1900s as a model for
Mendel’s genetic theories. Later, breeding of brothers and
sisters for 20 generations led to a homogenous breed, the DBA
mouse, that would not reject tumor homografts, a useful trait
for cancer research.
Although some warned that the inbreeding reduced their value
as models, many other inbred strains became popular: C57BL,
BALB/c, C57BR, “A” and 129. By the 1950s, the mapping of
genes in mice had developed, and the nuclear era brought fine
structure mapping of the genome because of the systematic
observation of large deletions and translocations.
Ethylnitrosourea (shown), ENU, was used to produce single

10.2.4. Standardized Rats
20 or more generations of brother-sister matings among rats
leads to low phenotypic variance with more consistent
experimental results. Inbred rats tend to become too susceptible
to specific cancers (for example, F344/N rat and B6C3F1/N
mouse). Genetic drift causes body weights to increase and
survival rates to decline in rat colonies. This is deleterious in
particular to 2-year carcinogenicity studies.
Inbred rats are better in experiments aimed at clarifying
mechanistic principles.
Outbred rats present a genetic variability similar to
human populations, but larger numbers are then
required for statistically appropriate data.

10-12

The corporate Global Alliance for Laboratory Animal
Standardization (F10.11) maintains the genetic profile of its
rats by examining polymorphism frequency for 17 loci on 9
chromosomes. Each colony is resampled and monitored
annually to verify genetic consistency. Mating of closely
related animals is minimized by a rotational breeding system.
Each of the 4 breeding colonies in the world are restarted every
5 years from the original source colony or from cryo-preserved
embryos.
The genetics of the rat or mouse itself is not the only concern.
The large intestine of mammals is populated with hundreds of
types of bacteria. Bacterial diversity increases from carnivory
to omnivory to herbivory. Conventional wisdom is that they
help the organism absorb nutrients that would otherwise be
indigestible, manufacture vitamins, kill germs, neutralize
bacterial toxins and modulate the immune system.
By contrast, farmers have known for a long time that some
amount of antibiotics in the feed improves weight gain by
limiting bacterial biomass.
But bacteria may have more complex interactions with the
body by turning on specific intestinal genes, promoting the
growth of blood vessels in the gut and triggering production of
chemicals that control bacterial populations.
It is possible to create germ-free rodents using antibiotics,
thereby providing a minimalist bio-system.
However, these rodents must consume 30% more calories to
maintain normal body weight, and are unusually susceptible to
infections. They also have a poorly formed intestinal network
of capillaries. The need for some bacterial flora, which is
difficult to control, renders the goal of a monotypical test
animal even more difficult to reach and maintain.

mutated by gene insertion or inactivation to more closely
resemble human models. This has been achieved for human
diseases such as colorectal cancer and sickle cell anemia.
Roughly 7500 mutant mouse strains have been created.
10.2.5.1. Transgenic Mice

Transgenic mice may improve accuracy and efficacy because
they respond to carcinogens more quickly than conventional
rodent strains, and they may provide more mechanistic
information. These animals have specific genes added to their
normal genome by microinjecting DNA into the pro-nuclei of
one-celled embryos. Typically, “transgenic” mouse models
carry activated oncogenes or inactivated tumor suppressor
genes (F10.13) involved in neoplastic processes. After
exposure to chemicals in the animal, the added gene can be
extracted from the DNA of various tissues of the animal
(retrievable mutation shuttle vectors) and tested for integrity
(absence or presence of mutation). Transgenic rodents (F10.14)
can substantially speed in vivo toxicology testing, but have
been found to lack sensitivity, detecting only a few of the
known carcinogens.
Stratagene introduced the Big Blue Transgenic Mouse to assess
mutagenic potential of test compounds. The assay is an alternative to
tests such as the two-year animal bioassay proscribed by the National
Toxicology Program (NTP). The NTP bioassay involves the dosing
of a large number of animals with an endpoint of tumor formation. In
contrast, the endpoint in the Big Blue assay is mutation of a test
gene, and it only takes three to four months. Integrated into the
chromosomes of the Big Blue mice is a retrievable lambda phage
shuttle vector containing the bacterial lacI gene. The lacI gene serves
as a reporter gene for mutation that can be retrieved from any organ
of the animal to assess mutation frequency in that tissue.

10.2.5. Genetically Modified Animals
Over three decades, the conventional rodent bioassay has been
the standard for identifying carcinogens. But mice can be

After a few weeks of exposure to different doses of the test
compound, the transgene is shuttled into bacteria, where
10-13

mutations in lacI can result in a blue plaque phenotype when
plated on bacterial lawns.
F10.11. Harvard Medical School’s
Oncomouse, looking for patent protection.
The various flavors of the mouse have a single
transgene (ras, c-myc, c-neu, SV40) and promoter
inserted into an normal genome for the study of
various cancers.

F10.13. The effect of loss of p53 genes on mouse survival.
Donehower LA, 2003.

10.2.5.2. Knockout Animals

Knockout animals (we now have over 1000 knockout rodents
available) are transgenic animals in which specific genes have
been disabled in order to assess separately the impact of their
removal.
Almost all genetic models are designed to detect cancer or
mutations. F10.13 shows survival data from three C57B6 mice
experiments. In animals with two p53 genes (p53 +/+ or “wild
type”), 50% of the mice die of cancer. When one (p53 +/-) or
two (p53 -/-) copies of p53 are removed, survival is
considerable shortened, and almost all mice die of cancer.
It is believed that the p53+/- mouse would be more sensitive to
genotoxic agents. Note that mice that express excess p53 have
low incidence of cancer, but short life-spans14.

F10.12. Creating and marketing genetically controlled rats:
Wistar Hannover GALAS rat.

A typical transgenic model is the Tg.AC mouse, which carries
the v-Ha-ras transgene, one of a class of oncogenes that plays a
key role in cell proliferation in the early stages of tumor
induction. The Tg.AC mice would allow detection of both
genotoxic and non-genotoxic agents.
These models will probably seem naive in a few decades,
because the methods probably underestimate the complexity of
toxicity processes. The problem is that genetic systems are
themselves complicated, and that toxic reactions are difficult to
predict purely from genetic knowledge.

These new techniques adds to the richness, but also to the
complexity of the dataset. But actually, the genetically
10-14

F10.15 . Studying Carcinogenicity with Transgenic Rodents.

manipulated mice may contribute the most knowledge in
relation to their own mutation. Not one has yet contributed to
produce a drug that cures a disease. Furthermore, knocking out
a gene can have one effect in one strain of mice, but a different
one in another strain7. The availability of genetic information is

TRANSGENIC
MODEL
TSG-p53
v-Ha-ras
K6-ODC
rasH2

F10.14. Studying Mutations with Transgenic Rodents.
MOUSE

BigBlue

GENE INSERT
LacI
(bacteriophage )

MutaMouse

LacZ
(bacteriophage )

lambda cIl

CIl
(bacteriophage )

gpt-delta

gpt with the plasmid
pYG144
(bacteriophage 

PhiX –174

X174 am3
(bacteriophage )

SupF

SupF
(bacteriophage )

RpsL

rpsL, confers
streptomycin sensitivity
(from E. coli)

DETECTION OF MUTATION
Phage particles are plated on a bacterial host in the
presence of Xgal.
Wild type lacI gene will produce a clear
bacteriophage plaque, while those that have
sustained a mutation in the lacI gene will produce a
blue plaque.
Phage particles are plated on a lacZ- E.coli strain
in the presence of X-gal.
Wild type lacZ will produce blue plaques and
lacZ mutant clear plaques.
The cIl protein induces the integration of the
lambda DNA into the bacterial genome, and this
results in lysis. A mutation in the cIl gene results in
growth of lambda particles and lysis of the cell.
gpt gene is sensitive to point mutations.
rad and gam are sensitive to deletion mutation.
Phage particles are plated on E. coli YG6020. This
results in excision of the plasmid from the
bacteriophage DNA, and creation of a plasmid.
Plating on plates with 6- TG selects for mutants in
the gpt gene. When the phages are used to infect
XLI Blue MRA (P2) cells, only those particles that
are missing the rad and gam genes will be
Spi-, which means that they form plaques on the
P2 lysogen (Spi = Sensitive to P2 Interference).
Reversion assay at the A:T base pair, am3 site.

GENETIC CHANGE

APPLICATIONS

deficient in p53
v-Ha-ras fused to fetal zeta
globin promoter
Expresses ornithine
decarboxylase

Tumor biology, potential carcinogens
Initiated skin for non-genotoxic
carcinogens
Low-dose chemical risks

C-Hras with promoter

Mdr1a

Disrupted Mdrla

Mdrla/b

Disrupted Mdrla/b

pim-l
TSGp53/BigBlue
Xpc

More pim-l oncogenes
lacI, p53 knockout
heterozygous
Xpc knockout

Rapid onset, higher incidence of tumors
(agiosarcomas, lung adenocarcinomas)
Blood-brain barrier deficiency
Penetration of drugs in brain, testis,
ovaries, adrenal glands
Lymphomas by chemicals
Screening of mutagens and tumorigens
Skin carcinoma after UV

an irresistible draw, and the pharmaceutical industry is gearing
up to use bioinformatics to find drug targets (F10.16).
F10.16. Using BioInformatics to find
Drug Targets.

People directing
the human genome
project foresee that
100 years will be
needed to take
advantage of the
information
gathered.
Genetically
modified animals
are still restricted from the point of view of general toxicology.

supF mutants do not suppress amber mutations in
the lacZ gene in the host cell.
Recover plasmid from animal cells by
electroporation.
Plasmid with a mutated rpsL gene will result in
colony formation on streptomycin plates.

10-15

10.2.6. Classic Types of Animal Tests

4. Provide dose ranges for further (longer) studies.

F10.17. Classical Animal Toxicity Study types.
STUDY

DURATION
Recuperation

DOSE

Acute

0.5 month/
recuperation

Single dose
& day

0.5-1 month/r
1-3 month/r
3-18 month/r
24 month

Repeated
Repeated
Repeated
Repeated

Sub-Acute
Sub-Chronic
Chronic
Carcinogenicity

TESTS

ANIMAL

LD50

Mouse, rat/M&F

Draize/Skin
& Eye

Rabbit

Many
Many
Many
Focused

Rat
Rat & Dog
Rodent & Non-R?
Rodent

Each type of animal study prepares the next level, to insure that
large sums are not invested in studies using the wrong doses,
for example.
Some important aspects of animal testing have been very
poorly controlled until now. In an effort to minimize test costs,
mouse chow has traditionally been obtained from low cost
sources (Purina LRD5001). Unfortunately, such food contains
36 times more arsenic than the EPA recommends for drinking
water (10 ppb)16. Since these foods also contain cadmium,
chromium, copper, lead and zinc, the unfortunate toxicologist
looking for low-level effects will be completely and
unwittingly blinded: how can he detect the effect of 10 ppb of
arsenic if the animals are subjected to a change from 400 to
410 ppb?

Acute studies administer single, large doses of an agent to an
animal. The route of entry should be as representative of likely
human exposure as possible.
Acute skin irritation studies are often performed in rabbits for 4
hours of contact on a shaved back.
Acute inhalation studies are often also performed over 4 hours.
The effects are often dramatic, but frequently, the jumble of
signs and symptoms are not useful in determining mechanisms
of action or of assistance in determining possible therapies.
Acute toxicity experiments can be a frightening experience,
with effects ranging from death to severe, transient incapacity
and illness to very mild signs and symptoms. There are
situations where an acute, high level, exposure might result in
the delayed appearance of some form of toxicity (hepatic or
renal function, neurotoxicity, etc).
Given the diversity of responses to chemicals, what endpoint
would be common to all? Death is the only clear choice. This
determines the risk to human handlers of the chemical and
allows comparison of the potency of one chemical with that of
another (T1.9). Physicians need to know the LD50 as they
cope with symptoms in a patient.

LD50 (median lethal dose) for acute oral toxicity is the
statistically derived single dose of a substance that can
be expected to cause death within 14 days in 50 per cent
of young adult albino rats when administered by the oral
route. The LD50 value is expressed in terms of mass of
test substance per mass of test animal (mg/kg).

10.2.7. Acute Tests
Objectives:
1. Quantitative determinations of LD50, skin & eye irritation
thresholds.
2. Identification of target organs and clinical manifestations.
3. Establish the reversibility of toxic responses.
10-16

The safe handling of chemicals in an industrial setting depends
on adequate information on lethal dosages, as does transport of
such agents and even environmental exposures. We have all
seen media reports showing derailments of tank cars containing
chemicals that threaten (real or imaginary) the safety of a
community. LD50 is also essential to police and firefighters
engaged in controlling accidents, in patrolling or cleaning up a
contaminated area or in combating industrial fires.

10.2.8.3. Up & Down

In the Up and Down Procedure, one animal is orally given an
appropriate dose (175 mg/kg is the default starting dose) and
observed for up to 14 days.
If the animal is alive at 48 hours after treatment, a second
animal is orally given a preset higher dose (0.5 log spacing or
3.2 times more, by default).
If the first animal dies, then the second animal is dosed at a
preset lower dose (0.5 log spacing by default). Dosing stops
when one of three stopping criteria is satisfied, with as few as
six, but not more than 15 animals used per test.

Today, the move is toward obtaining an estimate of the relative
potency using, essentially, a range-finding study with only a
few animals. This is hardly a new concept, an extensive study
published in 1948 showing that most values obtained in this
manner were within 30% of the LD50 obtained by the more
classical study approach.
Is this sufficiently accurate for most purposes? Canadian,
U.S.A., and EC regulatory agencies say so, and no longer
require that full LD50 studies be done.

10.2.8.4. Limit Test

The limit test is used to determine if the toxicity of a test
substance is above or below a specified dose. Five to ten
animals of each sex or 10 animals of the susceptible sex are
administered a dose specified by regulations. Toxic responses
occurring within a given period are recorded. Based on the
results, a regulatory action or additional testing may be
required.

10.2.8. Acute Toxicity Test Techniques
10.2.8.1. Classic LD50 (Trevan, 1927)

What is sacrificed by not conducting the Classic LD50 study?
More precision on the LD50 value and a more solid knowledge
of the morbidity associated with the agent (because of the
increased number of "cases" observed).

The Classic LD50 test determines the lethal dose (LD50) of a
substance that kills 50% of test animals. It typically uses 100 or
more animals.
The substance is administered in increasing doses, usually 5 or
more, to groups of 10 male and 10 female animals. Mortalities
are recorded within a given period, and the LD50 is determined
with statistical calculations.

In the classical LD50 determination (5 treatment dose levels, 10
animals per sex per treatment), there are usually 30 to 40% of
the animals surviving. Those surviving at high dosage are more
valuable than those dying, since it gives the investigator the
opportunity to record:

10.2.8.2. Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) Test Guideline 401 (1987)

Acute oral toxicity is estimated with three dose groups of five
rats of one sex, with confirmation in the other sex using one
group of five rats. This reduced the minimum number of
animals used for acute oral toxicity to about 20.

(1) the persistence of toxic effects,
(2) the development of late toxicities.

10-17

10.2.9. Subchronic Tests
The goals are:

The exposure is always via the route by which the human
might acquire the agent. A minimum of three dosages (highest
dose not more than 10% of the LD50) plus the control group
should be used, based on the results of acute toxicity data. The
investigator hopes to obtain a graduation in effect with dose.
The highest level of exposure must produce overt toxicity,
without altering normal physiology unduly.
If sub-chronic tests have already been performed, perhaps the
Maximum Tolerated Dose is already known. This is the dose
that leads to a 10% decrease in animal weight, compared to
controls, at 3 months.

to establish a NOAEL and a dose-response and
to detail organ alterations at various levels of toxicity.
Workers are typically exposed to potential toxicants repeatedly,
at levels far below those of acute toxicity. Is there any
cumulative effect from repeated exposure?
There is a need to examine short-term (subchronic) and longterm (chronic) toxicity of the agents at exposures much lower
than those causing acute toxicity.
In acute toxicity, there is rarely opportunity to determine
mechanisms of action, since the observed effects arise from a
general overwhelming of the animals' body systems. General
failure is not the ideal situation to identify mechanisms.
Logically, at lower dosages, one should be able to correlate
more moderate signs and symptoms of toxicity with particular
target organs.

What endpoints of toxicity should be examined in sub-chronic
studies? Although one target may dominate your observations,
you should cover multiple organs and rely on a broad range of
toxic endpoints. The biomarkers used by the toxicologist range
from simple parameters as growth and development (sensitive
yardsticks of general wellbeing in small animals) through
hematological and biochemical measurements, to microscopic
examination of tissue morphology at termination of the
animals' lives.

The longer toxicity studies last, the more complicated
toxicokinetics (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion)
and physiological adaptations become: changes in membrane
permeability, specialized membrane transport, synthesis of
binding molecules, up- and down- regulation of receptors in
excitable cells, cytokine transduction, gene expression and
transcription, cell populations.

Dead are necropsied.
Animals examined daily: body weight, diet, fur,
respiratory or cardiovascular distress, motor, behavioral
problems, masses.
Gross and microscopic condition of all ±12 major
organs of all animals.
3 instances of complete hematology. Hb, hematocrit,
erythrocytes, total & differential leukocytes, platelets,
clotting time, prothrombin time and blood chemistry
(glucose, Ca, K, Urea nitrogen, alanine
aminotransferase, serum aspartate aminotransferase,
transpeptidases, dehydrogenase, phosphatase,

The duration of a subchronic study may vary from agent to
agent, but is usually 21-90 days. Shorter times may be
counteracted by higher dosages, e.g. a high level might show
the adverse effect more rapidly than a low level.

10-18

creatinine, bilirubin, triglicerides, cholesterol, albumin,
globulin, total protein).
Urinalysis: specific gravity, pH, glucose, ketones,
bilirubin, urobilinogen.

Little will be seen in MSDS sheets (T1.24) on the subchronic
and chronic toxicity of many chemicals, because such studies
have not been conducted.
10.2.10. Chronic Tests
The goal is a complete assessment of the long-term toxicity of
a chemical. In this context, feeding practices are important.

From such a study, a NOAEL may be obtained leading with the
proper safety factors to establishment of the Reference Dose
which may establish regulatory limits (EPA) of human
exposure.

Larger lab animals are fed at meals, while rodents are
commonly fed ad libitum (constant access to food in unlimited
quantity) which gives them higher blood fat, higher,
cholesterol, and greater incidence of heart damage and cancer,
a diabetic-type model, compared to the meal-fed rodents,
which have enhanced insulin sensitivity18. Meal-feeding is “an
important synchronizer of many behaviors and biological
rhythms,” and appears to alter the expression of genes that
code for proteins involved in the rate and amplitude of
biotransformation.

Seemingly straightforward biological markers can prove
misleading. Some drugs developed to fight osteoporosis
increased bone density, but also increased the risk of fractures.
Former heart drugs encainide, flecainide and morcizine
normalize irregular heartbeats, and were once prescribed to
hundreds of thousands of patients. Long-term trials later
proved that death rates for drug users were 2.5 higher than for
controls.
It is very difficult to tie specific biomarkers firmly to clinical
outcomes.

The public and the workforce are concerned with effects of
long-term low level exposures to toxicants in food, air and
water. Chronic toxicity studies conducted in rodents are
nothing other than extensions of the subchronic studies.
The same endpoints of toxicity are monitored in chronic
studies as in subchronic studies, but there are specific aims to
such studies:

The reversibility of the observed toxicity is an important
aspect frequently overlooked in both animal and human
studies. Patients and physicians want to know how long this
illness will last, e.g. the prognosis of recovery. Animal studies
are designed so that, at the end of the treatment period,
sufficient animals remain to be allocated to a recovery study, to
see whether the effects of the toxicant are completely
reversible, partially so, or irreversible. While this is useful
information to obtain, few toxicological studies provide this
type of information.

administer the toxicant for a major portion of the
lifespan of the animals,
demonstrate a dose-effect relationship,
provide data that can be used to extrapolate safe
humans doses.

10-19

While a two-year rodent study will represent somewhere
between 80 to 99% of the lifespan of the laboratory rat, a study
of the same duration in higher species is only a fraction of the
lifespan. A 24-month study in the dog covers 20% of its
lifespan. The exorbitant costs associated with prolonged studies
has led industry to press the regulatory agencies to reduce the
duration, first to 12 months and, more recently, to 6 months for
rodents. Two-year studies are still mandatory for dogs, the
usual non-rodent species. The case is made that, by adjusting
dosages upward, one can attain, in 6 to 12 months, the levels of
exposure encountered in 24 months, and that toxicity produced
in the 6-month study is the same as that found in a much longer
study.

You can certainly spot the weakness in such an argument:
excessively high dosages, problems in the normal
biotransformation and elimination of the high levels of the
toxicant and any reactive intermediates, the young age of the
animals (when most chemical-related toxicity appears in
mature humans), etc.
However, the regulatory agencies have accepted the shorter
studies. In spite of this, one still sees classic two-year studies in
the literature.
As with the subchronic studies, the dose-effect relationship
should be developed by proper selection of doses. Furthermore,
euthanizing representative subgroups of animals at selected
time intervals throughout the treatment period will help in
documenting the initial stages and the development of the toxic
lesion. This allows in depth exploration of possible
mechanisms of action.
As in the subchronic study, sufficient animals should remain at
the end of the treatment period in order to study the recovery
from the toxic insult, to answer questions about the
reversibility or permanence of the lesion.
The NOAEL (No Observable Adverse Effect Level) and the
NOEL (No Observable Effect Level) are desirable endpoints of
chronic studies. Occasionally, the lowest dosage may be close
to provide one of these values (F10.19).
Few MSDSs contain information about chronic toxicity. In
most cases, any evidence of chronic toxicity has been obtained
from epidemiological studies of occupationally-exposed
individuals. Relating specific endpoints of toxicity to many
years of estimated exposures often involving a mix of agents is
difficult.

F10.18. Variables measured in subchronic and chronic studies to assess
the general health of the test animals and to monitor the appearance of
adverse health effects.

10-20

10.2.11. Carcinogenicity Tests
Cancer-causing agents are usually effective only after
prolonged exposure. Since 24-months of exposure is necessary
to allow the development of some tumors in rats, shortening
chronic studies to 6 months would likely miss the carcinogenic
potential of a chemical. Very few chemicals produce tumors in
young animals, bis-chloromethyl ether being one exception,
capable of causing malignant tumors within approximately 90

together, with an extended dosage range (5 or 6 dosages rather
than 3). Those animals on the higher dosages will be
terminated at the 6-month time interval (except those for the
recovery study), while those at the lower dosages will be
continued for the required 24-month period, examined only for
tumor incidence (site, number, benign or malignant). It is
possible, though unlikely, that tumors might be seen in some
of the "chronic toxicity" animals exposed to higher levels of
the toxicant.

F10.19. Dose-effect
relation based on a
3-level exposure
chronic study, with
approximate
derivation of the
No Observed Effect
and No Observed
Adverse Effect
Levels.

days. Regulatory
agencies demand
24-month or
lifespan
carcinogenicity studies in rodents (mice, rats, hamsters) to
support submissions for the registration of chemicals for
importation, exportation, and sale. This means that the
chemical industry (pharmaceuticals, pesticides, solvents) is
committed to providing study data on the carcinogenicity of
their agent and to bear the cost of such studies.
The endpoint is tumor (benign, malignant) formation. Since
carcinogenesis may occur at much lower levels of exposure
than those required to demonstrate other types of chronic
toxicity, such studies typically use low levels of exposure
(F10.20). Given the large costs involved, the carcinogenicity
study and chronic toxicity study are often incorporated

F10.20. Theoretical results for a combined chronic
toxicity/carcinogenicity study where additional groups of animals were
exposed at 25% of the low dose (L/4), at 10% of the low dose (L/10) and
2.5% (L/40).

However, for many chemical exposures, the potential
carcinogenicity is not clear-cut, the results of the various
studies being equivocal, some being positive, some negative,
and some inconclusive.

10-21

10.2.12. Other Types of Tests
-Sensitization (immune) study: guinea pig skin,
administration of toxicant over 2-4 weeks, sensitization check
2-3 weeks after the last exposure.
-Sub-acute study: 14 days of exposure, 10 animals per sex in
rodents. Clinical chemistry and histopathology, 14 days of
observation after exposure.

done in animals. If approved, clinical tests (I,II,III) can start as
the chronic (3-18 months) animal tests proceed (F10.21,
center).
To get permission for Phase I clinical studies, the company
reports all about the preclinical stage, and describes the Phase I
plan in detail. 8% of the drugs that start Clinical Tests are
eventually approved, pushing the cost of developing a new
drug to about 2 B$. About 40% of research costs relate to the
drug discovery process, while 60% account for drug
development.

10.3. Human Tests
Epidemiology uses existing human exposures to assess health
impacts. Under many circumstances, the available data is
insufficient. Also, epidemiology cannot provide data on
chemicals not yet introduced, since there is no human
exposure. To get data on new drug candidates, for example,
some humans must be exposed at some point.
A company can make a new drug, and test it in test tubes and
animals without telling anyone. Test-tube and animal tests are
preclinical: they come before testing the new drug in humans.
Legally, the company just needs to mark the packages,
"Caution: Contains a new drug. .Not for use in humans."
Since the company's aim is to someday sell the drug for use in
humans, it designs preclinical tests (in vitro and in animals) to
get permission for the next testing stages.

10.3.1. Clinical Tests
10.3.1.1. Phase I: (10 M$, 1.5 years)

Phase I clinical tests are the first drug administration to
humans, and are mainly about safety, not efficacy. Subjects in
Phase I take a real risk, as animals do not “tell” you everything.
Phase I tests are done on 10-100 healthy paid volunteers.
Doses are carefully increased, and the effects measured, to
establish the Maximum Safe Human Dose.
Clinical trials can often be confounded by placebo effects, an
ill-understood phenomenon that is only beginning to be
investigated. That is why clinical trials are often conducted
double-blind.
Besides measuring safe doses, Phase I informs on mechanism
of drug action. Keeping number of subjects small avoids
unnecessary risks. If the drug is known to be toxic (AIDS and
cancer drugs often are), patients with the disease are substituted
for healthy volunteers.
Monitor: blood pressure, temperature, blood and urine samples,
toxicokinetics.

Successful preclinical testing (F10.21, left) shows that a drug is
unlikely to poison humans. Over 90% of drug candidates
effective in test tubes fail in animal studies. The drug does not
act as intended, or is poisonous. Only 1% of the drugs that start
the tests progress to the clinical stage. For those that do, the
process took about three years.
For approval of an Investigative New Drug by the FDA, both
acute (2 weeks) and sub-chronic (1-3 months) studies must be

10-22

are due to inability to outperform placebos, 30% due to safety
risks, and 30% show no advantage over established therapies.
Some have suggested that Phase III trials should be replaced
faster alternatives and post-market surveillance, and that
current output of new drugs could be doubled by such a
measure. After Phase II, patients and insurers would rate
effectiveness, and drugs could then be handled based on that
feedback. Though companies would still be liable for
unforeseen side effects, patients and doctors would be warned
that the drug was approved based on provisional research.

F10.21. Time Course of Drug Development. Total cost for the
development of a new drug is about 360 M$US. These costs can be
lowered by improved screening.

After approval, the drug is monitored by the pharmaceutical
company itself for side effects that can only be discovered by
use in many more thousands of humans.
The result should be an authoritative confirmation of drug
effectiveness. But a number of drugs were taken off the market
after their initial approval: Vioxx, Seldane, Rezulin and Baycol
are examples. Some risks do not become evident before the
drug has been used on millions of people, essentially because
we do not know ahead of time what to look for.

Scientific American.

10.3.1.2. Phase II: (20 M$, 2 years)

Phase II clinical tests zero-in on the therapeutic range, below
toxic effects.
200 patients with the targeted disease are tested, looking for
proper therapeutic range, dosing regimen, appropriate end
points of treatment and documenting drug efficacy.
Patient records: with control group, refine treatment dose and
duration.
10.3.1.3. Phase III: (45 M$, 3.5 years)

The arthritis medication Vioxx was on the market for 5 years
before withdrawal in 2004 due to increased risk of heart attacks
and strokes. 55,000 Americans died while taking Vioxx, and
other similar painkillers, such as Bextra, were also withdrawn.
In 2007, a cardiologist showed that Avandia, a blockbuster
antidiabetic drug, increased the risk of heart attacks. The claim
was found to be true, but Avandia was kept on the market,
because of its efficacy, but with a strict warning label.

Phase III clinical tests are mainly about the drug's practical use:
write-up of the long, fine-print instructions that accompany
medicines. Developing this information requires testing on
1000 patients, to assess and detect rare complications and find
specific practical recommendations in drug administration.
Requirements for this phase are especially demanding.
Separate, independent tests must show the drug to be safe and
effective. The company's report to government after clinical
testing is often 100,000-plus pages. It then takes about two
years for approval. 50% of drugs fail Phase III. 50% of failures

It may be impossible to have all the information about the
benefit-risk ratio of a drug at the end of the premarket phase, as
clinical trials include only 500 to 3,000 patients. So the full
10-23

range of a medication’s side effects is not likely to be revealed
until it is used by the general population, which includes
people with co-morbidities, pregnant women, and senior
citizens. Drugs are approved based on incomplete information
and inevitably, problems will emerge. Postmarket drug
surveillance (F10.21) is there to detect problems early and
efficiently.

response), and results may be selectively ignored to prop up
drug development success. For a variety of practical reasons,
an animal model may assess a chemical very differently than a
clinical human model, leading to basic incoherences.
10.3.2.4. Conflict of interest

The drug company, which tests and monitors its own drugs,
could aggressively disseminate data on the drug’s effectiveness
and closely guard information about its hazards. When hazards
emerge progressively from data, it is tempting to imagine that
early warning signs are statistical aberrations.
Panel members from government bodies such as the National
Institutes of Health often have strong financial relationships
with pharmaceutical companies, casting some doubt on their
impartiality.
New drugs, most profitable to drug companies, end up being
over-prescribed compared to older drugs that are as effective.
Also, the risks of old drugs are usually better known than the
risks of new drugs.
“Advertising may inadvertently minimize
the importance and power of medicines and their risks.”

10.3.2. Philosophical Questions on Clinical Testing
10.3.2.1. Use of human subjects

Is it feasible to fairly explain the potential risks to a patient in a
clinical trial, when the purpose of the trial is to learn about
these risks in the first place?
10.3.2.2. Breath of testing

How do you balance the need to test a drug comprehensively
with the need to make it available as quickly as possible?
Testing can be two of the following words, at the expense of the
third.
Cheap
Trustworthy
Fast
10.3.2.3. Performance of Testing

-William C. Weldon, Chairman of Johnson & Johnson

Since 1992 in the US, pharmaceutical companies pay the FDA
to defray the cost of reviewing drug applications, and this extra
money cut the approval time from 27 to 15 months, perhaps
bringing in more industry influence within the FDA.
But the proportion of drugs that later proved too dangerous
rose from 2% (1989-1992) to 3.5% (1993-2000).
In 2004, the US FDA estimated that a drug entering clinical
trials had an 8% chance of reaching the market, down from the
historic 14%.
The poorer performance may be due to time compression, or it
may indicate poor preparatory work.
Statistical methods of analysis may be incorrect, the test
methodology may not be appropriate (choice of test system and

10.4. In Vitro Models
In vitro cytotoxicity and cell viability assays predict toxicity
based on cell number, morphology, and metabolic activity.
In vitro testing is appropriate because of strategic reductionism,
cutting the complexity of living systems approximately in two:
there is an much complexity from the cell to the complete
organism as there is from the cell to molecules.
In vitro methods are favored for ethical and economic reasons,
and can provide better accuracy, sensitivity and resolution than
in vivo methods.
It is however difficult to conduct in vitro tests under conditions
that represent completely in vivo conditions. Primitive in vitro
10-24

10.4.2. Obtaining Cell Suspensions
To easily manipulate cells, it is desirable to obtain them as a
suspensions, as opposed to bulk tissue. This is usually achieved
using proteolytic enzymes (trypsin, pronase, collagenase,
papain) in diluted, calcium- and magnesium-free solutions.
After digestion of the extracellular medium, mild mechanical
manipulation of the cells will yield suspensions.
The extraction of the cells has undesirable consequences. In an
animal tissue, cells have contact with the extracellular matrix,
made up of protein (collagen, elastin), glycoprotein
(fibronectin, laminin), mucopolysaccharides and lipids.
Cellular messengers such as cytokines also influence cell
behavior in vivo. As normal cells are extracted from an animal
and placed in culture, they may lose some of their original
characteristics in a matter of days, as they react to extraction
from their original environment.
The experimenter must reassure himself that the characteristics
critical to his toxicological investigation are retained in the
model.

tests do not provide the range of physiological conditions
present in the body, nor the interactions among different cell
types. Cells used in tests are often transformed or cancerous,
exhibiting differences in gene expression and cell cycles.
In spite of this, high correlation coefficients are obtained when
indicators for general acute in vitro toxicity are compared to
LD50 values in vivo. So, it appears that toxicities depend mostly
on actions at the intracellular level, as opposed to the
extracellular level.
In vitro systems can use whole organs, tissue slices or cultured
cells. Cultured cells are very popular because detailed
microscopic observations are fairly easy when cells grow on
the bottom of a dish.
10.4.1. Diversity of Cells
Eukaryotes had only about 10 cell types until 1.5 billion years
ago, and 50 cell types until 1 billion years ago. The human
body typically contains about 100 trillion cells that fall into
about 300 specialized types.
Basic cellular functions are expressed at different degrees in
different types of cells. For example, nervous system cells
depend entirely on glucose for their energy requirements, while
liver cells have high biotransformation as well as protein
synthesis rates. These differences imply that complete in vitro
tests for integral toxicity screening may require consideration
of multiple cell types.
In vitro models of mutagenicity and genotoxicity (Chapter 13),
are already well accepted. Although mutagenicity and
genotoxicity testing would seem to be the ideal situation to
minimize the need for numerous targets (all cells have similar
DNA), even there, it has been found that results are enriched
by the use of numerous models.

10.4.3. Selecting from the Cell Suspension
Virtually all cell types can be grown in the laboratory over the
full range of durations required for toxicity testing. But some
cells grow more easily than others. Cells obtained from animal
tissue will contain a number of cell types. If the cells are grown
for some time, the most hardy cell type may take over the
culture. Because cells spread on a plate tend to automatically
fill the available gaps, cells that divide rapidly tend to dominate
in vitro systems as the cells grow over time.
If one requires a specific cell type, it is possible to select for
them using selective growth mediums, growth surfaces or
toxicants. A variety of techniques are used for further
purification.
10-25

10.4.6. Primary Cultures
Primary Cultures are cells that were extracted from animals
and have taken to growing in vitro. One can culture liver,
kidney, gland and endothelial cells as well as fibroblasts from
adult animals. Cells from the nervous system, heart and striated
muscle are usually obtained from embryonic tissue,
differentiating further in vitro.
When cells are obtained as primary cultures, it is necessary to
characterize them, in order to define explicitly what we are
working with. The definition will usually include
morphological and growth rate observations as well as the
functional-biochemical properties specific to that cell and that
may contribute to end-point observations in the experiment.
A table (T10.22) lists the properties often probed to confirm
such properties. The closer the cells falls in comparison to cells
in vivo, the better. Although one would like such
characterizations to be complete and encompassing, it is rarely
possible to be completely reassured.

Another method, called cloning, is to mechanically capture a
single or more cells and grow a culture from this material. This
procedure produces a cell strain.
For example, if we try to grow bone marrow cells, their
probability of forming colonies (cloning efficiency) are
generally below 1%15.
10.4.4. Normal Cells vs Cancer Cells
Normal cells have a limited lifespan in vitro. Consequently,
unless aliquots of a cell suspension have been frozen, it is not
possible to repeat exactly the same test twice.
Cancer or embryonic cells grow more readily than normal adult
cells. This is probably because less specialized cells tolerate
more easily the artificial environment of cell culture,
specifically the plastic or glass vessel, variations in the
concentrations of artificial nutrients and fluctuations in pH.
Whereas normal cells can go through about 50 doublings (the
so-called Hayflick limit), cancer cells will divide indefinitely.
This makes repetition of tests even in the far future a
possibility. The price for this convenience is that (1) they
differ substantially from the normal tissue they originate from
and (2) their karyotype is often abnormal.

T10.22. Examples of variables
that characterize in vitro models.

10.4.5. Stem Cells
Stem cells can generate some or all of the cells in the body if
properly controlled, and are therefore an important ingredient
in regeneration of diseased tissue. However, stem cells are
delicate to culture. They must be provided with fresh liquid
nutrients at least once a day, passaged each week and have
been successfully cultured only on nutrient layers of mouse
cells until recently. These layers must be replaced every two
weeks.

Hepatocyte

Proximal Tubule Kidney

Neurons

10-26

P450 activity
Albumin production
Gluconeogenesis
Steroid hormone inducible tyrosineamino-transferase and glutaminesynthetase activities
Pronounced Microvilli
Alkaline phosphatase activity
Maltase activity
Tetanus toxin binding
D2 and D3 proteins
Neurotransmitter synthesis
Neurotransmitter receptors
Acetylcholinesterase activity
High-affinity transport for transmitters
and precursors

10.4.7. Cell Lines
The difficulty of satisfactorily characterizing primary cultures
has led many investigators to use a different tactic. If cells are
successfully cultivated over time, the most rapidly growing
type will become dominant, becoming a cell line. In some
cases, the purity of cell lines can be increased by cloning.
When obtained from normal cells, the line will have finite
lifespan (60-80 doublings), an obvious disadvantage if tests
need to be repeated in the future.
If the starting material was cancerous, a continuous cell line
can arise, which can be cultured indefinitely, an obvious
advantage for future experiments. However, cancer cells have
diverse genotypes and phenotypes within the same culture,
making them less than ideal for most tests, except tumor
reduction experiments.
The ideal test object would be a normal cell that reproduces
indefinitely, while expressing stable karyotype and phenotypes.
In the past it has been possible to transform normal cell lines
using viral gene sequences or chemical exposure. Transformed
cell lines are immortal, and do not undergo senescence.
However, transformed cells are genetically metastable, and can
lose or gain whole or partial chromosomes. In many cases,
transformed cell lines exhibit abnormal gene expression
profiles that confound the study of biological mechanisms.
Recently, cells modified with human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) have become available, which have
unlimited division potential as well as stability in karyotype
and phenotype. This continuity allows comparability of results
from one experiment to the next, by freezing reference stocks
to ensure an indefinite supply of cells.

Bethesda, Md, USA). Therefore, if one is willing to select from
a long list, all the procedures of obtaining, selecting and
characterizing cells can be avoided. Also, so much research has
been done on the popular cell lines, that rich literature dossiers
are available.
10.4.8. Cell Line Fidelity
Repeatedly culturing cells (passaging cells from a old
container with depleted medium to a new one with fresh
medium) selects genetic or epigenetic modifications for
enhanced division that ultimately take over the culture.
Cell control mechanisms that would prevent this in vivo are not
paralleled in vitro. As cells are exposed to toxicants, the
composition by cell type as well as the properties of the cell
culture may drift, particularly if a test lasts for many cell
generations. Therefore, different experiments at different doses
may finally contain different cell populations, even if the cells
initiated from aliquots. This is also a problem in vivo, although
the difficulty is less readily measurable, hidden under the term
“toxicodynamics”.
The problem of cell diversity within continuous cell lines is
particularly evident in cancer cell lines. Under the microscope,
many different cell phenotypes can be seen. When karyotypes
are measured, substantial aneuploidy is documented. The
histogram of chromosome numbers within a continuous cell
line is in fact one of its characteristics (Chapter 14). Therefore,
the continuous cell line can be viewed, under ideal conditions,
as a stem cell producing a fixed proportion of various cell subtypes.
Human embryonic stem cells cultured for therapeutic purposes
also accrue genomic changes, when cultured at length. After 22
to 175 passages, stem cells developed copy number aberrations
(changed repeat number in genome). For example, 2 Mbase
amplifications encompassing the myc oncogene, as well as

A critical advantage of cell lines generally is that they have
become standardized, and are being distributed to researchers
at reasonable cost (American Type Culture Collection,
10-27

amplification of the whole 17q arm. Mitochondrial alterations
occur as well: missense in NADH dehydrogenases, nonsense in
ATPase 6. Higher promoter methylation is also frequent. 12

Some components of the media will decay rapidly with time
(glutamine), such that the shelf life of freshly made medium is
limited. Both pH and osmolarity of the media must be
controlled, a challenge in long duration tests. pH can be
somewhat controlled by using CO2 incubators or HEPES, an
organic pH buffer. Osmolarity varies over time because culture
flasks are not tightly sealed in the incubator to allow CO2 and
O2 equilibration. As a result, some evaporation occurs unless
the incubator is kept at 100% relative humidity, which in turn
favors multiplication of bacteria and fungi, always a threat in
the cell culture lab.
Certain types of cells are better maintained in culture at low
oxygen (5%) rather than ambient oxygen (21%), which is
thought to be due to decreased oxygen toxicity. On the other
hand, some other cells types may not get enough oxygen in
culture flasks, needing to build a tolerance for oxygen
depletion. When testing for toxicants that affect oxygen
metabolism, measured effects may rate as too high or too low,
depending on circumstances.

10.4.9. Cell Culture Medium
The non-serum part of cell culture media is made of a number
of pure chemicals mixed together to sustain cell cultures. This
is often supplemented by serum (5-20%) or other poorly
defined tissue extracts. The problem of purity existing for
animal food (10.2.6) is paralleled in culture media, because the
food of animals used to provide serum may not be tightly
controlled, making the composition of their serum unreliable,
even if known. When serum is purchased, the “batch” number
is specified, in an effort to eliminate variability in terms of
growth rates or immune components, for example.
Serum-free media eliminate serum supplements, improving the
stability of results and reproducibility, but they also remove
complex protective components such as albumin, a natural part
of the buffering and detoxification action of the blood. To
compensate, purified protein of human, animal or recombinant
origin (many formulations are kept secret) are added in place of
the serum (albumin, ferritin, transferrin, insulin, cholesterol).
Albumin (often bovine serum albumin) being such a complex
molecule, it is almost impossible to purify it completely, so its
re-inclusion to supplement chemically defined media
introduces variability. Rates of cell division generally also tend
to diminish in serum-free media because of the absence of
growth factors normally present in the blood. Some
formulations will increase concentration of protein, notably
insulin, to high non-physiological values, in an attempt to
compensate. But increasing insulin levels decreases the activity
of the SKN-1 protein, which normally promotes a set of Phase
II detoxification enzymes (glutathione among them) that
remove free radicals, leaving the cell more vulnerable to
ROS17.

10.4.10. Determining Test Doses for In Vitro Systems
If animals appear normal at the beginning of an in vivo test,
this guarantees a physiologically valid baseline. In animal
testing, the general appearance and behavior of animals also
acts as an effective guide to proper toxicant dosing.
The corresponding guides in cell cultures are not so obvious.
The normalcy of an in vitro situation is not as clear because
many cell cultures represent quite artificial conditions. For
example, cells in culture are adapted to strong changes in the
levels of nutrients and metabolites as a result of cell culture
medium renewal.
When doses of the toxicant are administered, doses could be
used that would kill whole animals simply because the most
susceptible tissues are not included in the test system.
10-28

To compensate, a larger range of doses
may need to be tested in vitro to gain
perspective, which has the advantage of
being more informative.
One must be particularly cautious of
toxicants with endocrine disruptor
capabilities which are extremely potent,
and may display flat or U-type dose responses. For example, in
cell cultures, doses of TCDD as low as 10-11 M are toxic, with
decreased viability observed even in nonproliferating cells.

spontaneously form over time. Also, the amount of plasma
protein available in the medium for binding of toxicants will
affect effective concentration.
Penetration through cell membranes may take seconds to
hours, depending on the properties of the agent.
As described in Chapter 8, biotransformation should be
maintained in vitro to more closely represent in vivo situations.
Ideally, an excretion route should be provided, although this is
beyond the capability of most in vitro test systems.
10.4.12. Testing Techniques
Although there are many limits to in vitro testing, the
attractions of high speed, sensitivity, reproducibility and
economy are quite strong. As a result, there is considerable
interest in developing in vitro techniques to increase the
usefulness by astute selection of highly specific molecular
probes or by using in vitro test batteries (multiple tests).
Whether cells are intoxicated can be measured in a variety of
ways. We will outline 5 typical methods11 below.
1. Active exclusion of substances such as Trypan Blue.
Dead cells ultimately present holes in their membranes,
because they are not maintained. Therefore, particles of Trypan
Blue inside cells are a sign of cell death, since this pigment
does not penetrate normal cells.
2. Active uptake of substances such as Neutral Red.
Neutral Red is a supravital dye which accumulates inside the
lysosomes of living cells. The pigment from dead cells is easily
washed away.
3. Leakage of cell constituents, such as lactate
dehydrogenase. Present in muscle, red blood cells and liver, the
molecule will leak out if the cell is damaged, and can be found
in the plasma.
4. Loss of activity of intracellular enzymes, such as in
the tetrazolium stain test. This stain (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium) is intracellularly reduced from a

10.4.11. Toxicokinetic Characteristics In Vitro
When toxicologists administer a drug to an animal at a certain
dose, sight is often lost of the fact that the agent is metabolized
and excreted, and it is implied that a single concentration is
valid for the entire inter-bolus period. If specific toxic
phenomena are indeed related to agent concentration, this
assumption would tend to smear toxic transitions and retard
detailed understanding.
The situation is similar in vitro, with the difference that a high
ratio of medium to cell volume may stabilize the agent, as well
as other concentrations. There is also the possibility for active
control of agent concentration to clarify toxic thresholds. But
there have been few serious attempts in the past to control in
vitro environments actively and automatically, because of
practical difficulties.
If the agent to be studied is sufficiently soluble in the culture
medium, it can be added directly and perhaps even controlled
by renewing the medium. If the substance is not, dissolution
can be aided using an organic solvent such as ethanol or
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), although these substance may
introduce effects of their own, for example by allowing easier
penetration through cellular membranes. For proper dosing, it
should be verified that precipitates of the agent do not
10-29

pale yellow solution to a dark blue formazan crystals, which
reveals metabolic activity.
5. Reduced synthetic activity for molecules such as
albumin. Made in liver cells and secreted extracellularly.
The EEC's policy of no animal testing for the development of
novel cosmetics has given impetus to in vitro methods.
In the pharmaceutical industry, in vitro methods are frequently
used in screening for new drugs. Therefore, in vitro success
determines in large part the cost of drug development. More
relevance can be obtained from in vitro testing by
- acquiring knowledge of basic physiology, so that relevant
molecular targets are chosen and
- by multiplying the number of molecular targets and tests,
taking advantage of automation (screening).

F10.23. Formats for high density bio-assays.

techniques. Multi-Well dishes (F10.23) for bio-assays come in
two current sizes, 96 (~0.3 ml/well) and 384 wells (~100
µl/well). These dish formats are supported by an array of
instruments for sample preparation, scanning readers and
washers.
For example, multiwell-based fluorometric assays for the
inhibition of the principal cytochrome P450s (CYPs) have been
available since 1997.

Many tests depend on simple colorimetric or cellular
observations on material that is less complex than what they
are intended to represent. For example, activation of a single
heat stress gene may not have the same meaning as the
activation of an array of genes as a result of thermal insult.
Artificial skin tests, for the most part, barely make an attempt
at reproducing the architecture of the skin. Can a dye
penetration test represent well the most basic phenomenon
present in skin, such as erythema?

10.4.12.2. Fluorescence-activated cell-sorting

In pharmacology, physiology and mechanistic toxicology,
molecularly targeted information is obtained using chemical
techniques dependant on the availability of specific fluorescent
antibodies or dyes. The fluorescence enhances contrast with the
background image.
Fluorescent techniques identify and localize specific molecules
within a specimen. This leads to spectacular images with
multiple stainings.
The "pretty pictures" are great for localization, but are
somewhat weaker for quantitative information. Note that in
publications, the pictures always seems to prove the point of
the article, but that you much more rarely see a systematic
analysis of all the available microscopy fields, together with
quantitative analysis.

10.4.12.1. Multi-Well Test Techniques

Automation of tests will provide more information per unit of
human effort. Most of the traditional techniques of toxicology,
for example necropsies and histology, are labor-intensive
methods.
There has been a drive towards assay miniaturization, similar
to Large Scale Integration in the electronics industry, aimed at
the development of High Throughput biological assay

10-30

Flow cytometry is more easily quantified than classical
microscopy, but is not as easily automated for time series
analysis. Flow cytometry has been used for cellular work and
to diagnose diseases of the blood and bone marrow, allowing
discrimination based on fluorescent labels targeted to specific
cellular markers.
10.4.13. Implementation of Cytotoxicity Testing
Mammalian cell cultures currently evaluate biocompatibility
and toxicity of materials in medical devices and associated
products. A variety of cell types (T10.25) which differ in
relative sensitivity and in the time required to conduct the assay
are used. These methods have shown good correlation with
animal assays and are frequently more sensitive to toxic
materials. Several of these cytotoxicity test procedures are
widely accepted in biomaterial screening, quality control and
audit programs.

F10.24. Principles of the Flow Cytometer.

If basic engineering problems of image segmentation,
interpretation and analysis could be solved, the power of these
techniques could be enhanced.
A somewhat more quantitative technique is flow cytometry
(F10.24). In this technique, individual living cells are sucked
through a fine capillary so that they line up. As they go through
a laser beam, scattered light allows various determinations to
be performed.

T10.26. Correlation of Growth Inhibition with LD50 at 24h
Growth Inhibiting
LD50
Chemical
Concentration50 (M)
(M)
Hypophosphate
9
8
Methylenehydroxydi125
300
phosphate
Phosphoformate
1000
>4000
Phosphonoacetic acid
1000
>4000

T10.25. Cell Lines in Common use in Cytotoxicity Testing.
L929
Mouse fibroblast
WI-38
Human embryonic lung
HeLa
Epitheloid carcinoma of the human
cervix
VERO
Monkey kidney cells

10.4.13.1. Direct Contact and Agar Overlay

Used for evaluation of biomaterials:
well-characterized, easy to culture and
reproducible.

Mouse fibroblast cells (L929) cell cultures are grown to a
standard monolayer. Duplicate samples of test material, as well
as negative and positive controls, are placed in direct contact
with the cell layer for 24 hours. The monolayers are fixed and
stained and finally examined microscopically for the presence
of morphological changes, decolorization, reduction in cell
density or lysis induced by the test material.

When a human cell type is required.

Specialized tests for virucidal efficacy testing.

10-31

such as methyl mercury, lead and paraquat, have a subpopulation (25%) that stops growing13.
Measuring the growth of cells over time (~a week) as they are
exposed to toxicants is the gold standard of cytotoxicity
measurements. It measures the ability of cells to divide and
form colonies. A cell with damaged DNA may still live for a
long time and give a false negative in a dye-exclusion assay.
Cell counting, particularly if done automatically to insure
statistical significance, has the potential to detect reliably both
low-dose and high-dose effects of toxicants.

10.4.13.2. Minimum Essential Medium Elution and End
Point Titration

The test material is extracted for 24 hours in Minimum
Essential Medium (MEM). Mouse fibroblast cells (L929)
monolayers are exposed to test, negative and positive control
extracts and examined for morphologic changes or cytolysis at
48 hours to determine a toxicity score within a range from zero
(no effect) to 4 (nearly complete cellular destruction). The USP
method requires testing in duplicate while the ISO method
requires triplicate plates.
Extracts of test materials shown to be toxic in the Minimum
Essential Medium Elution Test can be serially diluted (End
Point Titration) to determine the highest dilution for which
there is no toxic response.
10.4.13.3. Alterations in Cell Growth

Water extracts of graded quantities of the test material are
made and incorporated into tissue culture medium. The extracts
or serial dilutions are evaluated for inhibition of cell growth by
determining the protein content of monolayers at zero time and
72 hours after incubation under standard conditions. Data are
expressed as the amount of test material which results in
minimal inhibition of cell growth (less than or equal to 10%) or
50% inhibition of cell growth. This procedure can be used for
evaluation of medical device plastics, ophthalmic solutions and
similar products.
If toxicity is going to be measured in terms of cell growth, we
have to interpret cell growth in terms of toxicity.
When immune cells divide quickly, it is usually because of a
raging immune response.
On the other hand, all cells have complex growth mechanisms
that are vulnerable to almost any type of metabolic toxicity,
providing a wide-ranging net for toxicity detection. For
example, oligodendrocyte precursors, when oxidized by agents

F10.27. Human cells in culture can be observed over time with
automated computer vision systems. Héroux, 1996.

10-32

10.4.14. Advanced Applications of Cell Culture in
Toxicology
Microscopy, computer imaging and automated cell tracking
can be implemented for days on 96-well dishes contained in
incubators (F10.27). This allows a continuous and detailed
record to be kept in the form of thousands of images.
The advantage of such advanced systems is that they allow the
simultaneous measurement of changes in cell division rate,
reproductive sterilization, necrosis and apoptosis. Such detailed
data on cell behavior is of great value for cancer research.
Even the gathering of a single measurement such as 50% cell
proliferation inhibition is of value8 in predicting LD50 in mice,
as shown in T10.26. It is also correlates with reduced body
weight9 in animals.
REFERENCES
1. Methyl mercury poisoning in Iraq. Bakir, F. et al. Science 181, 230-241, 1973.
2. Angiosarcoma of the liver in the manufacture of vinyl chloride. Creech, J.L. and Johnson, M.N. J. Occup. Med. 16, 150151, 1974.
3. Acute fenitrothion poisoning. Ecobichon, D.J. et al. Can Med. Assoc. J. 116, 377-379, 1977.
4. The concept of multispecies testing in industrial toxicology. Zbinden, G. Reg. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 17, 85-94, 1993.
5. Distinct requirements for ras oncogenesis in human versus mouse cells. Genes and Development, 16:2045-57, Aug. 5th,
2002.
6. Redesigning Humans: our inevitable genetic future. Gregory Stock, Houghton Mifflin Co, 2002
7. Strain-dependent embryonic lethality in mice lacking the retinoblastoma-related p130 gene.
LeCouter JE, Kablar B, Whyte PF, Ying C, Rudnicki MA. Development. 1998 Dec;125(23):4669-79.
8. Understanding Cell Toxicology. Walum E et al. Ellis Horwood, 111, 1990.
9. Toxic effects of some xanthine derivatives with special emphasis on adverse effects on rat testes. Dhalback M et al.
Toxicology 32 23-35, 1984.
10. Early aging associated phenotypes in p53 mutant mice. Donehower L., www.gen.cam.ac.uk/iabg10/
10th Congress of International Association of Biomedical Gerotology, Cambridge, UK, 2003.
11. In Vitro Methods in Toxicology. Jolles G and Cordier A. Academic Press, 1992.
12. Genomic alterations in cultured human embryonic stem cells. Maitra A et al. Nature Genetics, published online
2005/12/04.
13. Chemically Diverse Toxicants Converge on Fyn and c-Cbl to Disrupt Precursor Cell Function . Li Z, Dong
T, Pröschel C, Noble M, PLoS Biol 5(2): e35, 2007.
14. p53 mutant mice that display early ageing-associated phenotypes. Tyner SD et al. Nature 415(Jan. 3):45-53. 2002.
15. Review: Serum-Free Media for Cultures of Primitive and Mature Hematopoietic Cells. Sandstrom CE, Miller WM,
and Papoutsakis ET. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 43, Pp. 706-733, 1994.
16. Laboratory diet profoundly alters gene expression and confounds genomic analysis in mouse liver and lung. Kozul
CD et al. 2008. Chemico-biological interactions 173(2):129-140.
17. Direct Inhibition of the Longevity-Promoting Factor SKN-1 by Insulin-like Signaling in C. elegans. Tullet JMA et al.
Cell 132, 1025–1038, March 21, 2008
18. Meal-Feeding Rodents and Toxicology Research. Gale B. Carey and Lisa C. Merrill. Chem. Res. Toxicol., Article ASAP
May 29, 2012. DOI: 10.1021/tx300109x
19. There’s more to life than rats and flies. Jessica Bolker. Nature, Vol 491, 31-33, November 2012.

10-33

11.1. Anatomy. 2
11.1.1. Cell Types . 2
11.1.2. Animal Anatomy .2
11.1.3. Bronchi . 3
11.1.1. Alveoli . 3
11.1.2. Cilia . 6
11.2. Aggressors .6
11.2.1. Particulate Matter.6
11.2.1.1. Particle Size .6
11.2.1.2. Irritation Response to Particles .7
11.2.1.3. Particle Pathology .7
11.2.2. Coal Mining Cases .7
11.2.2.1. Case 1. . 7
11.2.2.2. Case 2. . 8
11.2.2.3. Case 3. . 8
11.2.2.4. Case 4. . 8
11.2.3. Silicosis . 8
11.2.4. Asbestosis . 8
11.2.5. Agents producing Reactive Airway Diseases .9
11.2.5.1. Byssinosis .9
11.2.5.2. Occupational Asthma . 9
11.2.5.3. Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis . 10
11.2.6. Asphyxiants . 11
11.2.7. Irritant Gases . 11
11.2.8. Pharmaceuticals . 12
11.2.9. Agents inducing Chemical Toxicity . 13
11.2.10. Agents of Lung Cancer . 14
11.2.11. Cigarettes . 14
11.3. Evaluation of Lung Function . 15

11.3.1. Bronchial Provocation . 15
11.3.2. Spirometry . 15
11.3.1. Chest X-ray . 18

11-1

11.

airway epithelial cells, unique to the lung. Enzymatic activity is
similar in both segments, both having a number of cell types in
common.
More than 40 cell types can be found in pulmonary tissues, but
most occur as well in other tissues of the body (vessels, blood
cells, bone, nerve, etc). The functions of several cells are
poorly understood.
Seventeen of these cells are epithelial (5 of these are not
present in all species), 9 are in the connective tissue (7 of those
are trafficking leukocytes), 7 are in blood vessels, 5 are in
nervous tissue, 2 types of bone cells, 2 types of muscle cells,
one pleural cell, one cartilage cell and one cell of the attenuated
fibroblast sheath.
Of these cells, only 4 are unique to the lung: non ciliated
bronchiolar cells or Clara Cells, squamous cells (Type 1 cells),
great alveolar cells (Type 2 cells) and alveolar macrophages.

11.1. Anatomy
The general anatomy of the human
respiratory system is depicted in
F3.4.
Some characteristics of the human
lung are shown in T11.1. Remember
that the lungs can change several of
these dynamic parameters quickly,
given increased physical activity, a
noxious odor, an irritant (thereby
altering respiration rate, depth), etc.
T11.1. Characteristics of Human Respiration.
Levine, Pharmacology. Drug actions and reactions. Little, Brown, Boston 1978.

Human Pulmonary Characteristics
Exchange Area (air)
Area of the Pulmonary Capillaries (blood)
Number of Alveoli
Air-Blood Barrier Thickness
Particle Size penetrating Alveolar Space
Respiration Rates

Every cell from the Type 1 to tracheal epithelial cells can now
be cultured and studied, and tissue culture of lung cells is now
common to study the lung.
A large amount of research is done with rodents, large animals
are not often used.

Value
200 m2
90 m2
300-400 x 106
0.5 -1 µm
2 µm
6-200 liters/min
9-300 m3/day

11.1.2. Animal Anatomy
It is not easy to extrapolate data obtained from animal experiments,
usually conducted by nose-only inhalation, to humans. Not only are
the respiration rates and volume vastly different (T11.2.), but so is
the structure of the respiratory tract. Significant differences exist in
the deposition of particulate matter (T11.3.) among four routinely
used species. Thus, animal experimentation must be carefully
assessed when considering pulmonary uptake and toxicity in
humans.

11.1.1. Cell Types
Pulmonary epithelium embryologically derives from
pharyngeal endoderm, which differentiates into (1) an upper
laryngobronchial epithelium and (2) a lower bronchioloalveolar lining. The bronchiolo-alveolar lining contains the

11-2

11.1.3. Bronchi
A system of bronchial tubes
leads air to 300 million alveoli in
Inspirations the lung. The bronchi (F11.5) are
Species
/minute
reinforced with cartilage and
Human
12
muscle cells, so that they
collapse less quickly under
Dog
10-30
pressure than the alveoli.
Cat
20-30
As air proceed into the lung,
Hamster
35-130
there is considerable lung surface
Monkey
40-60
expansion (F11.6) to 70 m2. The
Rabbit
40-65
airflow resistance as a result of
Rat
65-110
reduction in airway channel
Guinea pig
70-100
diameter was discussed
Mouse
80-240
previously (Poiseuille’s Law,
page 3-6). Because of the considerable expansion of the air
section of the airways, flow resistance is not concentrated at
the lowest level of the lung. 85% of the flow resistance is in
airways more than 2 mm in diameter.
T11.2. Rates of respiration.
ARS/Sprague Dawley.

F11.4. Anatomy of the airways. German & Stanfield, 2002.

Because of the considerable surface area, as well as because of
rapid diffusion through gases, early systemic effects from
pulmonary acquisition of a toxicant is usually as rapid as the
sleep-inducing effects of a volatile organic anesthetic.
The agent is rapidly absorbed into the systemic circulation.

The blood returning from the lungs goes directly to the heart
and is pumped out into the periphery, more than 20% directed
to the brain. In the first "pass" through the peripheral
circulation, the agent does not flow through the liver (only
through the kidney). Systemic toxicity can therefore occur
before biotransformation1.

T11.3. Percent of total respiratory deposition
following exposure to diluted cigarette smoke.
Binns et al. Toxicology 6, 97, 1976

Species
Rat
Mouse
Hamster
Guinea pig

Larynx
5.8
3.8
6.1
1.2

Trachea
4.2
1.4
3.8
1.5

11.1.1. Alveoli

Lungs
72.1
58.1
71
84.7

Lung tissue is essentially a foam (F11.7): it contains large
alveoli of air lined with blood vessels for air to liquid-phase
gaseous exchange. The walls of the alveoli are made of thin
epithelium and elastic fibers.

11-3

F11.6. A log-log graph showing the geometry of the total cross sectional
interface of the lungs vs linear distance into it. Williams and Burson.
F11.7. Histology of lung tissue. x 200. Biological Structures.

F11.5. Histology of bronchus. x 75. Biological Structures.

11-4

F11.8. Appearance of
alveolus. The small
(Kohn) pores are
intended to equalize
pressure between
alveoli.
Williams and Burson.

Air reaches the
alveoli (F11.8) after
more than 20
bronchial
branchings.
100 ml of blood
interfaces within the
lungs with air
through membranes as little as 0.14 µm in thickness. Red
Blood Cells (RBC) are cruising in almost a single file in the
capillaries, along the walls of the alveoli (F11.10).
The septum alone (between air and blood) is about 2 µm in
thickness (lower part of figure 10.10). Acute lung exposures as
well as oxygen deprivation often produce edema in the lung
(F11.9), similar to drowning in your own body fluids, because
of reduced transfer of O2 and CO2.
F11.9. Pulmonary edema: red
areas show leaking of fluid from
capillaries to the alveoli of the
lungs. Nitric oxide can be
administered to treat pulmonary
edema.

F11.10. Blood capillary of the wall of an alveolus. The alveolar space is
filled with air. The Endothelium contains the blood, the Epithelium
lines the alveoli. Williams and Burson.

The airway mucosa brings inspired air to body temperature and
humidity, and removes bacteria and particulates. If you breathe
too fast in the winter, your deeper lungs can become irritated as
a result of incomplete temperature and humidity equilibration.

11-5

Cilium action is vulnerable to cigarette smoke, chlorine,
ammonia, sulfur oxide, nitrogen oxide, cadmium, nickel and
mercury fumes.
The lung’s defense mechanisms to support bronchial clearance
include mucus, cilia and macrophages. Immune cell activity
is prevalent in the lung, as shown by the cytokines and other
cellular mediators that are washed out of the lung in vivo
experiments.

11.1.2. Cilia
The mucus secreted within the airway is thin at the base of the
cilia, so as not to impair movement, and thick at top to trap
particles. Without mucus, the epithelium looks like shag carpet
(F11.11).
F11.11. Cilia. The holes
in the “carpet” are
locations where mucus
is generated.

11.2. Aggressors
There are 2000 agents known to collectively produce various
types of lung diseases. While gases may reach all the way to
the alveolar sac, vapors will deposit along the secondary and
tertiary airways (small bronchi and bronchioles), depending on
the droplet diameter, while dusts and particles may penetrate
beyond the bronchi or even the nose and throat, according to
size (T11.13.).

Williams and Burson .

T11.12. Classes of Pulmonary Toxicants.

11.2.1. Particulate Matter
11.2.1.1. Particle Size

Particles
fibrous material: silica, coal, asbestos
non-fibrous material
o inorganic (iron, Be, Sn)
o organic
-dust from raw cotton, gains
-molds from bagasse, etc
-proteins, detergents, etc
Irritants
of upper, lower, or entire airway
dependent upon solubility in mucus

Particles of non-soluble materials taken up by the lungs can be
deposited in the lung by impaction (>25 µm), sedimentation
(1-5 µm) or diffusion (<0.1 µm). The particles can be cleared
by the lung in the sputum, can be dissolved by immune attack
from macrophages or can remain in the lung as permanent
irritants, potentially causing disease.
There is no dose-effect relationship on the basis of particle
weight in respiratory diseases. Most of the mass of aerosolized
dusts is made of large particles which precipitate quickly,
trapped in the nose and throat. The important fraction is the
number of particles per unit volume below 6 µm, because it
can be deposited in the lung.
Ultrafine particles, for example from urban air, carry far more
toxic combustion hydrocarbons per unit mass on their surface

Chemical Toxicity
-cellular damage producing fibrotic tissue
  (paraquat, BHT)
-carcinogenesis
  (PAHs, etc)

11-6

than larger particles. Very small particles can lodge in the
cell’s mitochondria, inhibiting and killing them. Some
substances that cause no damage as 10 µm particles are highly
inflammogenic as sub-micron particles5.

role in the response to respiratory pollutants. The Nalp3
inflammasome is also involved in responses to bacteria.
11.2.1.3. Particle Pathology

The general particulate matter pathology term for the lung
is pneumoconiosis, defined as the accumulation of dust in
the lungs, and tissue reactions to its presence.

Cascade impactors have been developed to divide
contaminated air samples into respirable and non-respirable
fractions. In industry, general limits on dusts have been set at
106 particles/m3. Levels above this standard indicate poor
ventilation practices.

Dust deposition in the lungs often leads to chronic restrictive
disease, because there is a reduction in lung elasticity, without
significant airway disease. This occurs after many years of
exposure to fibrogenic or nonfibrogenic materials.
The term fibrogenic describes the chronic deposition of scarred
tissue (collagen) in place of normal lung tissue. The collagen is
nonfunctional, and tends to reduce gas exchanges. The best
examples are silicosis (miner's lung, coal worker's lung) and
asbestosis, characterized microscopically by the presence of
"ferruginous bodies". Those microscopic bodies are visible
under appropriate stains and originate from unsuccessful
macrophage attack of asbestos particles with iron-containing
lysosomes.

That size matters is obvious from the practices of the tattoo
parlor. For tattoos to endure, the pigments have to be the right
size. They must be small enough for macrophages to envelop,
but not so small that they will be digested and cleared away by
the cells. The optimal size for tattoo particles is 1 µm9.
T11.13. Inhaled particles retention.
Goldstein Aronow & Kalman, Principles of Drug action,
Harper and Row, 1968.

Region
Mouth, pharynx, trachea
Bronchi, 2nd, 3rd bronchi
Terminal bronchioles
Alveolar ducts
Alveoli

Size (µm)
20
20-2
6-0.2
6-0.2
2-0.2

11.2.2. Coal Mining Cases
11.2.2.1. Case 1.

A man began work as an underground coal miner in 1970, at
age 22 years. He worked underground for 31 years, all but 2
years in coal-face jobs (the area of the mine where the coal is
cut from the seam). In 2001, he began work in other areas
underground, and his chest radiograph indicated 4 small
category 2/1 opacities. In 2006, at age 58 years, his radiograph
indicated progression to 2/3. His exposure history (limited
exposure to silica dust) and slow disease progression were
consistent with coal workers' pneumoconiosis.

11.2.1.2. Irritation Response to Particles

Particulate airborne pollutants, such as asbestos and silica act
through a multiprotein complex known as the Nalp3
inflammasome which signals exposure of macrophages to
internalized particles of asbestos and silica. This leads to the
activation of a potent inflammatory response. In the absence of
Nalp3, mice responded less vigorously to asbestos, supporting
the idea that this inflammatory sensing complex plays a key
11-7

11.2.2.2. Case 2.

accelerated clinical course is more consistent with silicosis
development than coal workers' pneumoconiosis.

A man began work as an underground coal miner in 1976, at
age 18 years. After 23 years in coal-face jobs, in 1999, his
chest radiograph indicated no evidence of pneumoconiosis.
Seven years later, at age 48 years, his radiograph revealed
category 2/2 small opacities and stage B progressive massive
fibrosis. This rapid disease development is atypical of the usual
clinical progression of coal workers' pneumoconiosis, which
can take 20-40 years to develop, and is more consistent with
silicosis. However, the man's disease developed without
apparent exposure to silica dust.

11.2.3. Silicosis
Silicosis results from repeated ingestion of particles of quartz
rock dust (SiO2) from such activities as sandblasting. Silicic
acid (H2SiO3 or silica gel) is produced inside the macrophages
that ingest the silica. They die, releasing toxic compounds that
lead to fibrosis. Late stage disease may show right heart
enlargement (congestive heart failure). It is a self-perpetuating
problem once exposed. No treatment is available.
The acute form of the disease is rapidly fatal (1-2 yrs). The
chronic form can take decades. The prognosis is quite poor in
moderate to severe cases.

11.2.2.3. Case 3.

A man began work as an underground coal miner in 1972, at
age 18 years. By 2003, at age 49 years, he had spent 6 years at
the coal face and 25 years as a roof bolter (drilling holes into
the roof of mine passageways, often through siliceous rock,
and inserting bolts to prevent rock falls), and a chest
radiograph indicated category 1/2 small opacities, suggesting
simple pneumoconiosis. During 2003-2006, the man continued
to work at the coal face. In 2006, his chest radiograph indicated
progression to category 2/2 small opacities. Although he had
spent most of his mining years as a roof bolter, a job generally
associated with silica-dust exposure, his disease development
pattern was more consistent with coal workers' pneumoconiosis
than silicosis.

11.2.4. Asbestosis
There are various types of asbestos: crocidolite, amiosite, and
chrysotile, that have been used in various types of insulation.
Pathologically, 0.5 µm fibers appear to be the worst.
Macrophages attempt ingestion of fibers in the lung (F11.14),
which leads to diffuse lung damage and fibrosis.
While there is less elastin detected in asbestosis, more of the
different types of collagen are found. The disease takes 20-40
years to develop, and the clinical outlook is poor. Asbestosis
can also trigger mesothelioma and, in association with cigarette
smoking, bronchogenic carcinoma (the rate is increased by a
factor of 80). Controlling exposure is the only solution.
Clara cells with high xenobiotic metabolism will proliferate at
the level of bronchioles and alveoli, even replacing mucus cells
in an effort to proliferate and repair the lung’s epithelium.
Asbestos is also linked with auto-immune diseases (rheumatoid
arthritis, lupus, and scleroderma)6.

11.2.2.4. Case 4.

A man began work as an underground coal miner in 1971, at
age 20 years. In 2001, after 30 years working in jobs at the coal
face and roof bolting, he had category 0/1 small opacities.
After 5 more years of similar work, at age 55 years, his disease
had progressed to category 1/2 simple small opacities and stage
B progressive massive fibrosis. This exposure pattern and

11-8

replenish, and symptoms are always worse when returning to
work.
Intermittent reactions can occur over the course of 6 to 8
years. As time passes, the duration of symptoms (chest
tightness, wheezing, shortness of breath) can increase.
There are significant changes in maximal expiratory flow rates
from spirometry, after exposure. Symptoms occur
intermittently at first. If protection is implemented, disease is
reversible, but permanent airway constriction can occur
otherwise.

11.2.5. Agents producing Reactive Airway
Diseases
Nonfibrogenic material may be inorganic (talc, fibrous glass,
metals) or organic (wood, raw cotton, flax bagasse, mouldy hay
or grain, tea, tobacco).

11.2.5.2. Occupational Asthma
F11.15. Passing a
battery of tests to
measure the severity of
asthma.

The longer you work
with symptoms of
occupational asthma,
the less likely
complete recovery
becomes. These
symptoms usually
include coughing,
wheezing, chest
tightness and
shortness of breath.
The symptoms often
start while at work,
improve at home but
sometimes awaken
the person at night.
Workers may also

F11.14. A macrophage attempts to dispense with an asbestos fiber. ROS
are induced by NADPH oxidase and the high iron content in asbestos
further catalyzes hydroxyl radicals. The cell then generates TNF and
other chemoattractants, stimulating fibrosis and tumor formation.
Boelsterli, 2007.

11.2.5.1. Byssinosis

While there is a strong component related to the mechanical
effects of the dust particles in byssinosis (brown lung in cotton
mill workers, silo worker's lung, farmer's lung), there is also an
antigenic component, since the organic vegetable matter will
draw an immunological response over time.
Cotton, flax or hemp fibers trigger mast cells to release
histamine, constricting the bronchi. Histamine stores need to

11-9

experience itchy or watery eyes, stuffy, runny nose and skin
rashes.
Woods (western red cedar, mahogany, teak, exotic woods from
Africa), flour, polyvinyl chloride fumes, and isocyanates
induce an immune response, with symptoms similar to asthma
(T11.15).
Toluene diisocyanate is widely used as an additive in the
production of polyurethane foam and paints. It reacts with
water with evolution of CO2. Once the individual is sensitized,
very small concentrations are effective in producing
obstructive reactions.

T11.16. Causes of Occupational Asthma
from Scientific American

Hazard
Laboratory
animals, birds,
insects, other
animal products

Plants, wood
dust

11.2.5.3. Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Pneumonia is often mistakenly diagnosed in Hypersensitivity
Pneumonitis, also named Allergic Alveolitis (T11.16.). Over
years, if the correct diagnosis is not made and if exposure
persists, the lungs can be permanently damaged.
10% of the victims of this disease do not develop full-blown
reactions, and they simply experience insidious shortness of
breath. When the symptoms become more severe, and the
situation is recognized, heavy lung damage has often already
occurred.

Biologic
enzymes
Isocyanates
Anhydrides
Metals
Fluxes

Farming is a hazardous occupation, the lung hazards spanning
mechanical effects, irritants, and chemical injury: ammonia,
anhydrous ammonia, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
hydrogen sulfide, methane, nitrogen dioxide, grain feed,
animal hair and skin, wastes, sandblasting residues,
organophosphates as well as pesticide dusts, sprays, liquid
pours, salves and dips all contribute.

Drugs, other
chemicals



Hydrogen sulfide has a physiological role in the body as a vascular
dilator, regulating blood pressure.

11-10

Persons at Risk
Laboratory workers, animal
handlers, veterinarians
Pigeon breeders, poultry
workers, bird fanciers
Grain workers
Entomologists
Crab and prawn processors
Bakers
Food processors
Tea workers
Tobacco manufacturers
Carpenters, sawmill
operators, cabinetmakers
Detergent industry workers
Pharmaceutical industry
workers, biomedical
researchers
Workers with polyurethane,
plastics, and varnish
Automobile spray painters
Workers with epoxy resins
and plastics
Tanners
Platinum refiners
Metal platers
Aluminum solderers
Electronic workers
Pharmaceutical workers
Workers with plastics and
rubbers
Insulators
Refrigeration workers
Hairdressers

Sensitizing Agent
Rats, mice, rabbits, guinea pigs
Pigeons, chickens, budgerigars
Grain mites
Moths and butterflies
Crabs and prawns
Wheat flour, rye flour
Coffee beans, castor beans
Tea leaves
Tobacco leaves
Wood dusts, including western
red cedar dust
Bacillus subtilis
Pepsin, trypsin, bromelain
Toluene diisocyanate
Hexamethylene diisocyanate
Phthalic, trimellitic, and other
anhydrides
Chromium
Platinum
Nickel
Aminoethylethanolamine
Colophony
Penicillins, cephalosporins,
methyldopa, spiramycin,
tetracycline
Azodicarbonamide
Urea, formaldehyde
Freon
Persulfate salts, henna

The involvement of the immune system in hypersensitivity
Pneumonitis is highlighted in “detergent worker's lung”. In the
manufacture of detergents, semi-purified proteolytic enzymes
(papain) are added. After a certain time, an asthma-like
condition results when the protein antigens are absorbed
through nasal membranes or in the lungs. An immune response
develops, with histamine release.
If substances do not cause either pulmonary fibrosis or
sensitization of the pulmonary immune response, they are
considered inert. However they can still load the respiratory
clearance mechanisms (mucociliary, phagocytosis) to the point
where physical blockage occurs, with a reduction in air flow,
and labored respiration.

T11.17. Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
Disorder
Aspergillosis
Bible-printer's lung

Source of Antigen
Aspergillus spores
Moldy typesetting water

Bagassosis

Moldy sugarcane

Bird (avian) contact lungs
Budgerigar-fancier's lung
Chicken-handler's lung
Pigeon-breeder's lung
Turkey-handler's lung
Cheese-washer's lung
Coffee-worker's lung
Corn-farmer's lung
Detergent lung

11.2.6. Asphyxiants
Simple asphyxiants such as CO2, methane or nitrogen are inert.
They are a threat because they replace oxygen. Chemical
asphyxiants like CO, H2S and cyanide on the other hand alter
oxygen-carrying capacity or respiratory enzymes.
11.2.7. Irritant Gases
Water soluble gases do not go very far into the lung. Many
gases such as ammonia, halogen acids (HF, HCl, HBr), oxides
of sulfur, hydrogen sulfide, sulfuric and nitric acids, all are
irritant to the upper respiratory tract because of their great
solubility in the mucus of the nose and throat. Fortunately,
these agents are sufficiently irritant to warn the exposed
individual of their presence before dangerous exposures are
reached. Exceptions to this rule are hydrogen sulfide and
ammonium sulfide, where tolerance to the odor can occur and
hypoxia strike without warning. T11.18 classifies respiratory
airway irritants.

Parakeets
Chickens
Pigeons
Turkeys
Cheese mold
Coffee dust
Corn dust
Detergents (process or
use)
Moldy hay or grain

Farmer's lung
Furrier's lung
Humidifier/air cond. lung
(Wood) Joiner's lung
Malt-worker's lung
Maple bark-stripper's lung
Mummy-handler's lung
Mushroom-worker's lung
Paper mill-worker's lung
Paprika-slicer's lung
Pituitary snuff syndrome
Sequoiosis
Smallpox-handler's lung
Suberosis
Tea grower's lung
Wheat-weevil lung.
Wood pulp-worker's lung

11-11

Hair dust
Humidifiers/air
conditioners
Sawdust
Malt dust
Moldy maple bark
Cloth wrapping of
mummies
Mushroom compost
Moldy wood pulp
Moldy paprika
Pituitary powder
Moldy redwood dust
Smallpox scabs
Moldy cork dust
Tea plants
Wheat flour
Moldy logs

Scientific American

Antigen Responsible
Various aspergilli
Unknown
Thermophilic actinomycetes
(Thermoactinomyces
vulgaris)
Unknown antigen (may be
present in avian droppings or
serum)
Penicillium casei
Unknown
Unknown
Bacillus subtilis
Micropolyspora faeni, T.
vulgaris, T. sacchari
IgG antibody reactions at
peripheral bronchi.
Unknown
Thermophilic actinomycetes
Unknown
Various aspergilli
Cryptostroma corticale
Unknown
Thermophilic actinomycetes
Various species of Alternaria
Mucor stolonifer
Unknown
Various species of Graphium
Unknown
Penicillium frequetans
Unknown
Sitophilus granarius
Various species of Alternaria

carbonyl [Ni(CO)4] or MMT (shown), manganese
methylcyclopentadienyl tricarbonyl), and volatile
hydrides (arsine, stibine, lithium, phosphorusphosphine [PH3]) all show greater toxicity than
their respective metals or metalloids, due to their
volatility, fine aerosols, and ready absorption
through the lung because of their lipophilicity.

T11.18. Respiratory irritants classified by vulnerable region.

Upper Tract

Tract and Lungs

Terminal passages
and Air sacs

Aldehydes
Alkaline dusts
Ammonia
Chromic acid
Sulfur
di/trioxide
Ethylene oxide
HCl, HF

Br, Cl, F, I
Ozone
Chlorine oxides
Sulfur chlorides
P trichloro-penta- chloride
Dimethyl sulfate
Toluene diisiocyanate

Arsenic trichloride
Nitrogen dioxide
Nitrogen tetroxide
Phosgene
Organic solvents

SO2 will penetrate the lung if adsorbed on particles, but NO2,
CO and H2S can reach to the alveoli on their own. Such agents
usually have a lower water solubility, or hydrolyze in the
mucus to produce irritating secondary agents such as carbonyl
chloride (phosgene) and oxides of nitrogen. Because they
reduce pH progressively, the chemicals become highly irritant
later (delayed effect). Some irritants alter respiratory function
and these changes are distinctive in some cases.
Metals, particularly when freshly generated as fumes, are of
small enough particle size to penetrate deeply into the lung,
and will be efficiently absorbed. For example, approximately
40% of lead dust or "fume" reaches the lungs and 10% of that
ingested is absorbed into the body.

F11.19. Cu-Zn and Mn Superoxide Dismutase
(Mn at position of arrows)
Molecular Toxicology, Josephy, 2006

11.2.8. Pharmaceuticals
T11.20
Occupational
exposure
(µg/m3)
Toxicity and
potency

"Metal fume fever" has been caused by inhaling fumes of
antimony, arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, cobalt, copper, iron,
lead, manganese, mercury, nickel, tin and zinc, creating a series
of symptoms not unlike those of malaria or influenza. The
worker develops chills, fever, nausea, cough, aches in bones a
few hours after exposure, with the fever "breaking" after
several hours, followed by profuse sweating and, by 24 hr after
onset, little trace of the condition.
Organic forms of metals (tetramethyl and tetraethyl lead, alkyl
aluminum, alkyl mercurials, metal carbonyls such as nickel

Examples of
drugs in this
category

Category I

Category II

Category III

Category IV

>500

500-10

10-0.1

<0.1

Low

Moderate

Potent

Highly
potent

Naproxen,
acetaminophen,
erythromycin

Atorvastatin,
nicardipine,
oxycodone

Thalidomide,
fentanyl

Leuprolide,
nafarelin
acetate,
ethlnyl
estradiol

from Pharmaceutical Technology, 2006

11-12

T11.21. Chemical Warfare Agents

11.2.9. Agents inducing Chemical Toxicity
Vapors and gases can have devastating effects on the
pulmonary tissue, damaging Type II Alveolar and Clara cells
that contain the Phase I and II enzyme systems involved in
xenobiotic biotransformation. In addition, as the Alveolar Type
II and Clara cells die, their place is taken up by fibrotic cells.
Unfortunately, fibrotic cells are not adapted to gas exchange,
leading to hypoxia.
We have learned much about chemical toxicity in the lung
through research on a herbicide, paraquat (F11.22). Paraquat,
also known as methyl viologen, acts as a catalyst for cell
damage, activating oxidation and lipid peroxidation. Oxidative
stress is a major aggressor in the lung: breathing 100% oxygen
destroys the lungs in about three days by superoxidation
While highly polar when absorbed by inhalation or by
ingestion of concentrated formulation, paraquat concentrates in
the lung as a result of a diamine-polyamine transport system.
There, it acts as a true catalyst, never broken down or
destroyed. It produces oxygen radicals (superoxide anion O2-)
that are converted to hydrogen peroxide by the tissue enzyme
superoxide dismutase (F11.19.). These derivatives attack
polyunsaturated lipids in cell membranes to produce lipid
hydroperoxides which, in turn react with other unsaturated
lipids to form more lipid-free radicals, thereby perpetuating the
system. The resulting damage to cell membranes and to
subcellular organelles (mitochondria) reduces the functional
integrity of the cells, affects efficient gas transport and
exchange and impairs respiration by destroying essential cell
types (Alveolar Type II, Clara cells). This fosters the
proliferation of fibrotic cells and a loss of elasticity of the lung.
Paraquat intoxication is fatal within 3 to 4 weeks, with no cure.

In the first world war, the use of chlorine, mustard gas and phosgene produced 1,250,000 casualties.

Agent

Mustard
(blister
agent)
C4H8Cl2S

Phosgene
(choking
agent)
CCl2O

Appearance
Odor

Colorless to
brownish
liquid; slight
odor of
garlic or
mustard

Colorless
gas; odor of
fresh mown
hay

Absorption

Skin
contact &
inhalation

Inhalation

Rate of Action

Delayed for
hours;
long-term
complication

Immediate to
72 hours

Lethal
Dose
(mg)

Effects

1500
inhaled
4500
skin

Eye &
airway
irritation,
tearing,
chemical
skin burns
& blisters,
pulmonary
edema,
respiratory
failure

3200
inhaled

Eye &
airway
irritation,
pulmonary
edema,
choking

F11.22. Mechanism of cellular action of paraquat.

11-13

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) from a
variety of petrochemical products,
combustion products of tobacco,
asbestos, nickel, beryllium, cadmium, and
low molecular weight, volatile chemicals capable of
being converted in vivo to highly reactive and unstable
intermediates that can mutate DNA.

The complexity of chemical-induced pulmonary toxicity is
illustrated by trimellitic anhydride (TMA), a chemical used
widely in the plastics industry and as an intermediate in the
preparation of resin adhesives, polymers, dyes, and printing
inks3.
This agent induces four syndromes in humans, three of which
are immunological, TMA acts as a hapten to induce
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Particulate material from combustion products (tobacco, wood,
coal, oil, etc.) may have potentially toxic chemicals adhering to
the surface of the particle. When inhaled and deposited in the
lung, it is possible for the toxicant to desorb from the particle
into the mucosal surface of the nasal passages, larynx, bronchi,
etc. The transfer efficiency depends on the physicochemical
properties of the agent (lipid solubility, molecular size,
electrostatic charge, van de Waal's forces). This results in high
concentrations of toxicant localized in small regions, for
example the bifurcation point in a bronchus where particles
build up. Mostly, lung cancer originates at the level of the
bronchioles.
From the above, it is not surprising that the International
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified diesel
engine exhaust as carcinogenic to humans (Group 1), based on
sufficient evidence that exposure is associated with an
increased risk for lung cancer and limited evidence for an
increased risk of bladder cancer. The IARC Working Group
also concluded that gasoline exhaust was possibly carcinogenic
to humans (Group 2B). There are currently no limits on such
emissions, but to control the cancer risk, they would probably
have to be set below 20 µg/m3.

TMA-flu;
pulmonary distress anemia;
immediate onset asthma;
immediate irritant syndrome (non-immunologic).

11.2.10. Agents of Lung Cancer
Lung cancer is an important cause of mortality, and is caused
by many factors. The cells of origin of many lung tumors are
unknown. Cigarette smoke is an important cause. However,
radiation (alpha, beta, gamma, etc), chemical carcinogens,
particles, immune status of the cancer patient, exposures to
other agents causing cell proliferation such as saline
(intratracheal instillations), mineral dust, etc. can all be
combined to result in cancer. Even stress and nutrition are
implied as etiologic agents.
Some exposures, such as raw cotton dust, appear to reduce by
40% the risk of lung cancer, possibly by encouraging a chronic
immune reaction7.
In contrast to what was described above for chemically induced
lung damage, carcinomas generally arise from long-term
exposure to low concentrations of:

11.2.11. Cigarettes

volatile amines (convertible to N-nitroso compounds),

Effects of air-borne industrial agents on health are small in
comparison with the effect of cigarette smoking.
11-14

The effects of smoking:

proteolysis. As a result of disturbed alveolus anatomy, there is
accumulation of uncirculated air pouches in the lung.

1. paralysis of cilia (one puff of cigarette smoke can paralyze
the cilia for 20-40 minutes),
2. irritation of the mucosa,
3. increased secretion of mucus, leading to reduced effective
bronchiole size,
4. hypertrophy of mucus glands encroaching on airway lumen
and leading to increased air flow resistance,
5. disabling of macrophages’ functions,
6. increase in macrophage and leukocyte population and
decrease in level of proteolytic enzyme inhibitors, leading
to progressive digestion of the septa.

90% of lung cancers are due to smoking. The death rate is 9095%.

11.3. Evaluation of Lung Function
11.3.1. Bronchial Provocation
In asthma, the bronchi respond to a number of stimuli.
Bronchial responsiveness can be important in establishing a
diagnosis of asthma. Acetylcholine, histamine or other
chemicals can be used to provoke an obstructive episode. But
dry, cold air is the safest agent to use.
Asthma and bronchitis primarily affect the bronchial tubes.
Asthma is an obstructive (obstruction to air flow) lung disease,
as opposed to fibrosis which is restrictive lung disease
(mechanical compliance of the lung is reduced – lung stiffens).

Nicotine shifts cells of the body into high gear,
mimicking acetylcholine. Nicotine prevents apoptosis and
boosts cell survival. Dermatologists say that nicotine can
speed dermal fibroblasts to go through a 10 week growth
phase in only 10 days. In young animals, nicotine
consumption increases probability of addiction to other
drugs8.

11.3.2. Spirometry
Spirometry is the measurement of expired and inspired lung
volumes. There are four subdivisions of total lung volume (see
F11.23:

About 600 additives have been used in cigarettes, one of which
is ammonia. Many were used for flavoring. Nicotine in
cigarette smoke is initially in the form of an electrically
charged non-volatile acid, preventing passage into the blood.
into a gas. Ammonia converts the acid to a free base or
uncharged alkaline form, enhancing transfer into the lungs by
as much as 100 times.

 
 
 
 

A similar procedure is used to treat cocaine with alkaline
materials to produce crack, which is much more lipid-soluble4.
Effect 6 above is more familiarly known as emphysema,
which is digestion of the walls of the alveoli through
11-15

Tidal volume (VT), the volume of air inspired and
expired with each breath,
Inspiratory Reserve Volume (IRV), the maximum
volume of air that may be inhaled beyond the normal
tidal breath,
Residual Volume (RV), the volume of air that remains
in the lungs after maximal expiration, an
Expiratory Reserve Volume (ERV), the maximum
volume that may be exhaled between resting end-tidal
position and residual volume.

F11.24. A normal spirogram compared to those in obstructive and
restrictive lung disease. modifed from Scientific American.

The FVC, FEV1, and FEV1/FVC ratio can be predicted from
Knudson’s equations (Am Rev Resp Dis 1983;127:725-734).

F11.23. Lung Volumes.

On the basis of these four volumes, four lung capacities can be
described:
  Total Lung Capacity (TLC), the amount of air in the
chest after maximum inspiration, equal to the sum of all
four lung volumes (TLC = RV + ERV + VT + IRV),
  Vital Capacity (VC), the maximum amount of air
expired after a maximum inspiration (i.e. the total
amount of air that can be moved in and out of the lungs
( VC = ERV + VT + IRV = TLC – RV),
  Functional Residual capacity (FRC), the amount of air
remaining in the lungs at the end-tidal position (FRC =
RV + ERV),
  Inspiratory Capacity (IC), the maximum volume of air
inspired from end-tidal position (IC = TV + IRV).

White Male, Age < 25
FVC = -6.8865 + (.059 * HT) + (.0739 * AGE)
FEV1 = -6.1181 + (.0519 * HT) + (.0636 * AGE)
FEV1/FVC% = 100.4389 + (-.0813 * HT)
White Male, Age ≥ 25
FVC= -8.7818 + (.0844 * HT) + (-.0298 * AGE)
FEV1-6.5147 + (.0665 * HT) + (-.0292 * AGE)
FEV1/FVC% =86.6862 + (-.105 * AGE)
White Female, Age < 20
FVC = -4.447 + (.0416 * HT) + (.0699 * AGE)
FEV1 = -3.7622 + (.0351 * HT) + (.0694 * AGE)
FEV1/FVC% = 109.9739 + (-.1909 * HT) + (.6655 * AGE)
White Female, Age ≥ 20
FVC=-2.9001 + (.0427 * HT) + (-.0174 * AGE)
FEV1=-1.405 + (.0309 * HT) + (-.0201 * AGE)
FEV1/FVC% = 121.6777 + (-.1852 * HT) + (-.1896 * AGE)
Height (HT) is in cm; AGE is in years.

The FVC, FEV1, and FEV1/FVC ratio are usually reduced
in subjects with obstructive lung disease.
Subjects with restrictive lung disease will have reduced
FVC and FEV1 but a normal or increased FEV1/FVC ratio,
because both the FVC and FEV1 are reduced by similar
amounts. Spirometry test results are compared to tables of
predicted values derived from a normal population of non-

The forced vital capacity (FVC) curve is determined by
asking the subject to give a maximum expiration as rapidly
as possible after a maximum inspiration.
The forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and the
FEV1/FVC ratio are derived from the FVC curve.
11-16

smoking adults. The predicted values are based on height,
age, gender, and race/ethnicity. Results are in liter and
expressed as a percentage of the expected Vital Capacity.
Normal
Obstructive
Restrictive
Mixed Obstructive/
Restrictive

TLC

FEV1
> 80%
< 80%
< 80%
< 80%

FVC
> 80%
< 80%
< 80%
< 80%

function testing in workers with advanced (PMF) disease
will show severe restriction or mixed pattern of
obstructive/restrictive defect, loss of pulmonary
compliance, and hypoxemia.
In acute silicosis there is usually a rapid progressive decline
in pulmonary function with eventual respiratory failure.

FEV1/FVC%
> 75%
< 75%
> 75%
< 75%

= total lung capacity

FRC
TLC
TLC
RV

FRC
RV

Chronic
Obstructive
Lung Disease

Normal

FRC
RV

= functional
residual
capacity
= residual
volume

F11.25. Volume
(accumulates air) and
Flow (measures flow)
Spirometers.

Restrictive
Lung Disease

Lung function abnormalities in classic, simple silicosis are
uncommon in the early stages, even when the chest x-ray
shows small rounded opacities. Multi-factorial effects of
cigarette smoking, the type of dust involved (such as a
mixture of dusts), the dose of the dust and the duration of
exposure, and the presence of other pulmonary diseases
such as tuberculosis may contribute in the alteration of an
individuals patient’s pulmonary function. Pulmonary
11-17

11.3.1. Chest X-ray

REFERENCES
1. Double fatal inhalation of dichloromethane. Manno, M., Rugge, M., and Cocheo, V. Human Exper. Toxicol. 11, 540-545,
1992.
2. Autoradiographic analysis of guinea pig airway tissues following inhalation exposure to 14C-labeled methyl
isocyanate. Kennedy, A.L. et al. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 20, 57-67, 1993.
3. The pathologic and immunologic responses to inhaled trimellitic anhydride in rats. Leach, C.L. et al. Toxicol. Appl.
Pharmacol. 87, 67-80, 1987.
4. Environmental Science & Technology, August 1997.
5. Ultrafine Particulate Pollutants Induce Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial Damage. Li Ning et al. Environmental
Health Perspectives Volume 111, Number 4, April 2003 .
6. Nested case-control study of autoimmune disease in an asbestos-exposed population. Noonan, C. et al. Environmental
Health Perspectives. Volume 114, Number 8, August 2006.
7. Lung cancer risk among female textile workers exposed to endotoxin. Astrakianakis, G. et al. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 99(March 7):357-364, 2007.
8. Low-dose nicotine treatment during adolescence increases subsequent cocaine reward (Program#/Poster#:
480.8/NN34). McQuown SC et al. Society for Neuroscience meeting. Oct. 14-18. Atlanta. 2006.
9. Disappearing Ink. Wu C. Science News, October 13th, Vol.172 #15, 2007.

F11.26. Chest X-ray showing an inflammatory process
in the left lung (“g”). Biological Structures.

Another important diagnostic procedure is the chest X-ray
(F11.26).

11-18

12.1. Vulnerability of Reproduction . 2
12.2. Vulnerability of Cell Division . 3
12.3. Reproductive Toxicity Mechanisms . 3
12.3.1. Timing of Events in Reproduction .3
12.3.2. Up- or Down- regulation of Nerve Transmission .4
12.4. Teratogenicity Index .4
12.5. Sperm .5
12.5.1. Chemicals . 7
12.5.2. Wi-Fi . 7
12.5.3. Temperature. 7
12.5.4. Age .7
12.6. Time-Course of Gestation .8
12.7. Vulnerable Periods . 10
12.8. Fetal Compartment . 15
12.9. Toxicity on Fertilization-Migration . 15
12.10. Teratogenicity Examples . 17
12.10.1. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. 17
12.10.2. Cigarettes . 17
12.10.3. Sound . 18
12.10.4. Thalidomide . 18
12.11. Delayed Effects on the Fetus. 19
12.11.1. Delayed Teratogen . 19
12.11.2. Endocrine Disruptors . 19
12.12. Types of Reproductive Studies. 21
12.12.1. Single Generation Studies . 21
12.12.2. Multiple Generation Studies . 21
12.13. Toxicants of Sexual Maturity . 2
12.14. Alteration of Sexual Identity . 2

12.15. Developmental Testing In Vitro . 2
12.16. Agents under Investigation . 2
12.16.1. Metals . 2
12.16.2. Chemicals . 3
12.16.3. Physical Factors . 3
12.16.4. Biological Agents . 3

12-1

Since adverse reproductive outcomes are common, the
detection of those that are specifically related to chemicals is
difficult. But recent evidence points to more troubling results.
An English study found that living within 3 km of a hazardous
waste landfill increases birth defects by 41%9.
Reproductive success is influenced by a wide range of factors,
from neurological components (loss of libido) to the complex
hormonal controls of both spermatogenesis and oogenesis,
specifically luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating

12.
Reproductive
Toxicology studies
the occurrence,
causes,
manifestations, and
sequelae of adverse
effects of exogenous
agents on
reproduction.
The potential for an
interaction between
a chemical and one
of the many stages of reproduction is almost inexhaustible.

T12.1. Causes of malformation in man.
Wilson, Fed. Proc. 36, 1698-1703, 1977

Mechanism
Genetic transmission
Chromosome aberration
Environment
radiation
infection
maternal metabolic imbalance
drugs and environmental chemicals
potentiation interactions
Unknown

12.1. Vulnerability of Reproduction
In humans, 1out of 8 pregnancies spontaneously miscarry
because of structural chromosome abnormalities in the fetus.
Other known causes are hormonal imbalance, infection,
alcohol, smoking and drug abuse. Mother’s immunity may
account for as many as 80% of unexplained miscarriages.

% Incidence
20
3-5
1
2-3
1-2
4-6
?
65-70

T12.2. Reproductive Outcomes in Human Development

While women are born with 1 million oocytes, only about 500 turn
into full-fledged eggs over their lifetime.
40% of all human embryos die before implantation
60% of all fertilized human embryos die during a normal pregnancy
7.5% of all delivered infants have developmental abnormalities that
interfere with survival or quality of life
Among wasted feti:
-chromosomal aberrations (65% of all first trimester abortions)
-35% are karyotypically abnormal
-30% have abnormal morphological development

1/200 people have chromosomal abnormalities at birth.
Drugs and environmental chemicals have traditionally
accounted for only a very small percentage of malformations in
man (T12.1), and the situation was believed the same for fetal
wastage (spontaneous abortions).
This may seem surprising, until one appreciates the normal
extent of early adverse reproductive outcomes (T12.2).

12-2

sensitivity of toxicant detection is magnified to the point where
some specificity is lost.

12.2. Vulnerability of Cell Division
The process of giving birth is composed of gametogenesis,
fertilization and embryonic and fetal development, all events
that depend heavily on cell division.
Gametogenesis, for example, is vulnerable because the stem
cells involved in spermatogenesis and oogenesis undergo
several cycles of mitosis (replication as diploid cells) followed
by stages of meiosis (reduction in the number of chromosomes
to a haploid state).
To carry out these activities, the nucleic acids (DNA) must be
dissociated from the protective protein (histones) that normally
surround the nucleic acid, leaving them exposed to chemical
attack.
Cell division is resource, hormone and cytokine dependant, and
division speed influences the outcome of embryo structures.
Any toxicity, even only changing the speed of processes, can
induce problems in embryo structure.
Considering the level of cell division that occurs in the process
of reproduction, it is surprising that so few cancers develop in
association with the process.
F12.3. Enhanced Toxicity Defense in Pregnancy.

12.3. Reproductive Toxicity Mechanisms

Scientific American.

12.3.1. Timing of Events in Reproduction

hormone (FSH, shown).
In spite of all precautions, test-tube babies are
twice as likely as naturally conceived babies
to have multiple major birth defects and are
more likely to be under weight at birth.

Any agent capable of altering the speed of cell processes, such
as so-called cell division checkpoints, is a potential teratogen.
There are specific reasons for this: the Hox genes (homeobox)
make up a set of conserved genes that setup an animal's body
plan. The physical order of the Hox genes along the
chromosomes corresponds to body sequence: head, thorax then
abdomen. This is also the order in which genes are activated
during development, so timing is important. Small differences

It is believed that in pregnancy, to preserve the reproductive
process, toxicity defenses of women are hyperactive, leading to
such symptoms as chronic nausea (F12.3). In this case, the
12-3

may be tolerated: much of the observed variations in dogs
result from genes that alter development speed. But when
pregnant sheep eat the “corn lily” mountain flower, they give
birth to lambs with grotesque birth defects, such as a missing
eye. The chemical responsible was named cyclopamine. It is
known that cyclopamine specifically inhibits the growth of
certain brain cancer cells (medulloblastoma)11.

emerge, but understandably, most alterations lead to functional
reductions.
12.3.2. Up- or Down- regulation of Nerve
Transmission
It is thought that exposure of developing fetuses to certain
drugs, for example, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, can leave a
permanent imprint in their brains (see Figure below).

In heterochrony, the timing of developmental events is
changed, and as a result radically different structures
can emerge. Heterochrony can result in heterotopy, which
means that a developmental event occurs in a new location.
Some structures could, as a result, come in contact with other
structures from which they are normally separated. Heterotopy
was shown in animals to result in a variety of phenomena, such
as extra set of legs or wings, or entirely unique structures. The
bone structure of chickens and turtles uses the same building
blocks, but heterochrony and heterotopy produce entirely
different body plans. For example, the relative location of ribs
and scapula (shoulder blade) is completely different in each
animal (Fig).

F12.5. A developing baby exposed to Selective Serotonin Reuptake
Inihibitors may set its serotonin system diffrently. Science News, June 2010.

F12.4. The scapula
(shoulder blade) ends
up in different
locations in different
animals as a result of
different
developmental
timing. American

12.4. Teratogenicity Index
What levels of exposures can produce malformations, as
compared to generally detectable toxicity?
The definition below relates an incidence of some form of
teratogenicity to some form of toxicity (maternal mortality, in
F12.6).

Scientist, May-June 2010.

Relative Teratogenicity Index = LD01/tD05

This explains why reproduction is so vulnerable: small changes
in the speed of processes individualize a person, but larger
changes can lead to malformations. When malformations can
be stabilized into a coherent whole, a different body plan may

An RTI of 1 means that toxicity is not specific to the embryo,
because a number of mothers also suffer toxicity. An RTI of 4
is the formal threshold indicating that the embryo is more
sensitive than the adult.
12-4

older mice (and maybe men) have a higher risk developmental
defects. A related protein, GPX4, is associated with infertility
in people34.
Spermatozoids are produced on-goingly from stem cells in a 74
day process. Each year after puberty, sperm producing cells
replicate about 23 times.
Sertoli cells are the elongated cells in the tubules of the testes
to which the spermatids are initially attached (F12.8). They
provide support, protection and nutrition. Using tight
junctions, Sertoli cells also provide the blood-testis barrier
which maintains different fluid compositions in the blood and
in the lumen of the seminiferous tubule, which is important for
sperm development. The barrier also prevents immune attacks
on sperm by the male’s immune system.
T12.7. Pathology at Conception.
Male function: sperm production and transport
Female function: maturation-release of ova and function of the corpus luteum

F12.6. Teratogenicity Index determination. Scialli.

The outcome of the teratogenicity can be interruption of the
reproductive process, or alteration of the newborn (classical
teratogenesis).

stress, infections, trauma (physical, mental)
neurological and hormonal components that govern libido, performance,
activity
stress, endocrine disorders, strenuous exercise and malnutrition in females
drugs, therapeutic agents, industrial chemicals

12.5. Sperm
Eggs normally repair any damage in their fertilization partners,
so scientists have been more concerned with eggs than sperm.
Eggs remain viable for 12 to 24 hours (ovulation), while sperm
can fertilize eggs for up to 5 days in the female reproductive
tract.
Glutathione peroxidase 5 (GPX5) prevents oxidative damage to
sperm DNA by fighting hydrogen peroxide. Without GPX5,

In spite of this, a large proportion of abnormal sperm are
produced. Men younger than 20 and older than 30 produce
more abnormal sperm. If as much as half of the sperm is
abnormal in morphology or motility, the male is usually
infertile.

12-5

F12.8. Testis.
F12.9. In the rat, seminiferous
tubules are about 150 µm in
diameter. Hair-like structures
are flagella of nascent sperm.

a: Seminiferous
tubule inside the
human testis.

F12.10. Human sperm anatomy.
Germann & Stanfield, 2002.

b: section of
seminiferous tubule
with location of
cells at low
magnification.

c: portion of
seminiferous
tubule, showing
association of
Sertoli and germ
cells.
Germann & Stanfield,
2002.

F12.11. Abnormal sperm compared to
Mr. Right (on the right). Guyton.

12-6

>

stages of maturation, having little or no effect on other stages.
Most spermatozoa would still appear normal. This is why
developmental maps of spermatozoa (F12.12) are useful in
identifying the vulnerable stage. The stem cells from which
sperm arise are tough and quite resistant to damage since, at the
level of the spermatogonium (Type A), some of them appear to
be recycled back to primordial cells, or at least to some
intermediate to await the initiation of the next wave of
spermatogonia. However, repeated, frequent exposures can
markedly suppress spermatozoal production, with a dramatic
loss in fertility, observed as morphologically abnormal
spermatocytes and low motility1 (PCBs5).

F12.12. Stages of
development of mouse
spermatozoa.

The importance of
sperm mobility in
determining
conception may
seem at first an odd
Olympic event at
the microscopic scale. However, sperm mobility is largely
determined by ATP, and this competition is probably nature’s
way of selecting for effective ATP variants.
One approach to male contraception is to give men doses of
testosterone. This turns off production of FSH and LH that are
necessary for sperm development.

12.5.2. Wi-Fi
Electromagnetic radiation from Wi-Fi connections
used in laptop computers decreases human sperm
motility and increases sperm DNA
fragmentation44. Such effects can be explained by
alterations in ATP production by high frequency
radiation45, 46.

12.5.1. Chemicals
Animals studies show that drugs, alcohol, radiation, pesticides,
solvents and other chemicals produce effects handed from
father to son.
Male mice exposed to cocaine pass on memory problems to
their pups40.
Male rats exposed to a fungicide (vinclozolin) in the womb can
pass tumors and diseases of the prostate and kidney down for at
least 3 generations39.
Fathers who smoke or are exposed to PCBs increase offspring
risk of brain tumors.
Babies of firefighters, painters, woodworkers, janitors and men
exposed to solvents in the workplace are more likely to be
miscarried, still born or to develop later cancers.

12.5.3. Temperature
During their 10 weeks of development, spermatozoa are
acutely sensitive to high temperatures. Fathers exposed to
excessive heat from saunas or electric blankets before they
conceive children seem to have higher rates of brain cancer in
their offspring30. The scrotum provides a temperature slightly
below body temperature, which is important to maintain sperm
production. Once produced, sperm can survive at normal body
temperature.
12.5.4. Age
The offspring of teenage fathers have increased risk of
premature birth and death and low birth weight 38.

In the male, sporadic exposure to a reproductive toxicant may
only affect the developing spermatozoa presently at certain
12-7

Parents over 40 have increased offspring incidence of autism
and schizophrenia, and 6 times more likely to have children
with Down syndrome37.
Fathers over 50 are about 30% more likely to have offspring
suffering from autism, schizophrenia and Down syndrome, and
to have daughters who develop breast cancer.

12.6. Time-Course of Gestation
In early gestation, effects of chemicals are likely to be drastic,
resulting in sterility or in loss of the embryo.
Sterility can result from interference in the synthesis of
gametes (sperm or ova), or from a lethal defect in fertilization.
Death and loss of blastocyst or embryo can also occur pre- or
post-implantation (F12.13).

F12.14. Gonadotropins and ovarian hormones during the female cycle.
Guyton.

(such as aspirin, acetaminophen and indomethacin) on
synapses in male’s preoptic area. These alterations affect
sexual behavior in later life23.
Until recently, it was thought that female mammals carried the
entire complement of ova that they would use during their
breeding lifespan. These ova come from primordial germ cells
formed during fetal development in utero which results in
several million oogonia, the bulk of which become atresic
(degenerate). A few survivors undergo meiotic reduction to the
haploid state and become arrested in a meiotic prophase state

F12.13. Frequency distribution of 723 losses among 4351 pregnancies,
by gestational age. Mattison.

In the latter stages of gestation, structural or functional
abnormalities are more frequent.
There are many examples of functional effects. We will
mention later the effects on alcohol on the developing brain.
Another one is the influence of prostaglandin E2 blockers
12-8

until puberty. Ovarian tissue may be affected toxicologically
while in utero (the developing female fetus is an exposed
future mother) or following exposure ex utero at any
postpartum stage of development.
It now appears that germline cells persist in the ovaries of adult
mice, and the same might be true in human females24.
Hormonal events in the female are depicted in F12.14 and
12.15. In the middle of the cycle, a surge of LH floods the
ovarian follicle, triggering maturation and release of the egg.
The first week of the cycle leads to light implantation (F12.16),
while 1 month leads to strong implantation.
F12.15. Estrogen secretion through life.

Why doesn’t the mother reject the fetus?

Guyton.

The fetus may use antigens from the Major Histocompatibility
Complex derived from his father’s genes. What if these genes are
incompatible with the mother’s immunity?
There has to be a mechanism inhibiting rejection. Is it
a placental barrier?
an antigen presentation modification?
that the mother’s immune system is forced to tolerate the
fetus?
Known facts8:
IDO, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, is an enzyme that
immune cells use to suppress other immune cells by breaking down
tryptophan, which immune cells may need to proliferate.
Cells at the placental interface produce IDO.
Hypothesis: fetus actively suppresses his mother's immune cells.
Observation: IDO inihibitors given to pregnant mice cause them to
abort genetically distinct fetuses ONLY.
Question: What would happen if a toxicant could inhibit this
enzyme?

F12.16. The first week of embryonic development in the oviduct and
uterus: ovulation, fertilization, cleavage, formation of morula and
blastocyst and beginning of implantation. Germann & Stanfield, 2002.

12-9

12.7. Vulnerable Periods
Following implantation, the embryo (so named in the first 3
months) develops in steps of organogenesis into a fetus (so
named in the last 6 months). To each of these organogenic
steps corresponds a "toxic windows" where particular
replicating cells are hypersusceptible to chemical attack,
frequently at a concentration of agent far below that required
for normal toxicity.
3% of newborns show some teratogenic anomaly at birth and
an additional 4% are labeled as defective at the end of the first
year of life. The later defects are functional ones that appear as
the baby grows.
For an effect from the agent to occur, it has to be present at the
right time and at the right concentration. The time interval of
greatest susceptibility is the period of organogenesis.
In the human, many organ systems develop over a span of 12
to 30 days, during which they may be susceptible to chemicals.

F12.17. Action of teratogens during embryogenesis. The red bars
indicate major malformations, the white bars indicate functional
alterations. Environmental Toxicology, 1996.

Organogenesis in humans is in the first 60 days after
fertilization, unfortunately at a time when a woman may be
unaware of her condition. After these 60-days, the effects of
chemicals on the fetus are more likely to be cancer, organ
dysfunction, behavioral and developmental abnormalities.

or female) should be protected from exposure if they are going
to bear children. As one might expect, the periods of
organogenesis vary between species (F12.19, 20, 21). In
laboratory animals, as is shown in T12.19 and F12.20, organ
development is condensed into much shorter periods, often
only of 24 hour duration.

Coming to the health specialist for relocation after finding out
about a pregnancy can provide only partial protection, as
exposure has likely already occurred. This is a problem in
occupational health, with a workforce that is 45% female, a
large percentage of which in child-bearing years. Parents (male

Standard teratology testing protocols now demand that the
pregnant test animal be exposed to the agent between days 6
and 15 (for mouse and rat) and between days 6 and 18 (for the
rabbit), thus covering the major span of organogenesis.

12-10

T12.19. Gestational Events in Several Species. Williams & Burson.

Species
Human
Monkey
Rabbit
Rat
Mouse

F12.18. Nausea and vomiting tend to peak between the 8th and 12th
week of pregnancy, the crest sensitivity of fetal tissues. Scientific American.

12-11

Number of Days after Conception
Implantation Organogenesis
6-7
20-56
9-15
20-45
7-8
8-16.5
5-6
9-16
4.5-6
7.5-14

Parturition
260-280
164-168
30-32
22
20

12.21. Rat responses to irradiation according to time of administration.
Chemical Exposure and Toxic Responses.

F12.20. Critical periods of embryogenesis. Periods of vulnerability are
short in many animal models. In the standard teratological study
protocol, pregnant females are exposed to three levels plus control from
day 6 to day 15 (mice and rats) or from day 6 to 18 (rabbits).
F12.22. Animals from the same litter do not necessarily
share the same fate. Hayes, 2001.

12-12

F12.23. Time-dependence of malformation rates. Persaud.

Specific malformations associated with a chemical exposure
will occur in a particular species at the critical periods
corresponding to appearance and development of cellular
structures (F12.24).
The time course of malformation probability in a specific organ
system can follow different unfoldings, as shown in F12.23.
In “A”, the foundation of an organ system is put into place,
leading to a sudden rise in malformation susceptibility.
Curve “B” reflects malformation rates corresponding to the
exponential phase of organ development.
When more than one cell population is involved in an organ,
the curve can be multi-phasic (“C”).
F12.24. Critical periods of gestation compared between human
and rodent.

12-13

F12.25. Rapid changes in the zebrafish embryo.

>

From American Scientist, Sept-Oct 2006.

While animal experiments can be controlled closely,
epidemiological investigations of teratogens in humans require
an association between exposure and a "congenital" defect. In
the case of thalidomide, the number of phocomelia cases was
orders of magnitude increased from the previously known
incidence rate of this rare birth defect. It took only a few
months to identify thalidomide as the inducing agent. But most
chemicals induce birth defects at a low rate, the risk ratio or
odds ratio usually being below 22. With so many confounding
factors in epidemiological studies, it is difficult to obtain the
tight associations needed to identify culprit chemicals in full
confidence.
When testing for teratogenicity, it is often convenient to use
models that develop rapidly and that are convenient to observe.
In the zebra fish, the first structures, such as the trunk muscles
and the head, begin to form 10 hours after fertilization. The
heart pumps blood and the fish begins to move its tail within
the first day. Other organs-eyes, ears and brain-start to form
during the first 24 hours. The larvae hatch and start to swim
when they are just a little more than 48 hours old. 3 days after
fertilization, the zebrafish embryo is fully formed (F12.25).
These 3 days are equivalent to 3 months in human embryos.
By day 5, the yolk is largely consumed and the embryo has
been transformed into an independent organism. By
comparison, a 5-day-old human embryo is merely a blastocysta hollow ball of cells that has yet to attach itself to the lining of
the mother's uterus.
F12.26. Transparent zebrafish
embryo.

12-14

The vulnerable periods delimit times at which embryonic
tissues have special properties relevant not only to toxicity but
also to regeneration. In a pig model, it was found that specific
times were optimal to maintain the activity of xenotransplanted
tissues: day 28 for liver, 56 for lung and 42-56 for pancreas.21

altered. This can be studied by the classical methods of
toxicokinetics (F12.27). However, compartmentalization is not
complete. A small concentration of fetal blood cells, as well as
fetal DNA fragments, circulate in the mother’s blood.

12.9. Toxicity on Fertilization-Migration
There are many factors that can affect conception (T12.5). For
example, female rats exposed to PCBs in the womb are more
reluctant to mate.
Fertilization occurs when the ovum meets the upwardmigrating sperm in the region of the ampulla of the Fallopian
tube. To penetrate the layers of the oocyte (the thick acellular
zona pellucida and several layers of granulosa cells), the
spermatozoon must have matured, becoming highly motile and
fertile, and achieved capacitation (changes in the sperm
surface and chemical changes within). This involves two
distinct reactions. The first, the acrosome reaction, results in a
series of fusions between specific membranes, with the release
of hydrolytic enzymes capable of penetrating the oocyte
granulosa cells, digesting them. The second, an enhanced or
activated motility, provides the extra flagellar activity to thrust
the sperm through the digested "tunnel". One can visualize that
a highly reactive chemical in seminal fluid could interfere with
these procedures, thereby reducing the fertility of the
spermatozoa.

F12.27. A two compartment toxicokinetic model adapted to explore the
disposition of a xenobiotic during pregnancy. Needleman.

Prenatal exposure to dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCB) congeners 118 and 156 is associated with strong
detrimental effects on fetal neurodevelopment in children.
Non-dioxin-like PCBs affect motor development, but not
mental functioning. This data is interesting in that some
prenatal periods for humans correspond to postnatal exposure
time windows for animals43.

The migration of the fertilized ovum down the Fallopian tube
occurs during a period of 4 to 5 days during which time the
cells double, double again and again from 1 cell to 2 cells to 4
cells, to 8 cells, to 16 cells, and to 32 cells, at which time the
cellular organization changes to produce the blastocyst
(blastocele). This rapidly dividing cell mass is susceptible to
chemical attack and may die at later stages following
implantation. This will result in spontaneous abortion during

12.8. Fetal Compartment
Since the fetus and placenta temporarily become
supplementary organs in the female, compartmentalization is
12-15

the 1st to 2nd months of gestation. Less drastic DNA damage
in these rapidly dividing cells may result in implantation, but in
loss of the fetus (early or late fetal death) or carriage of the
affected fetus to term, resulting in some structural or functional
anomaly.
Detailed genetic assessment of blastocysts reveals that many of
the cells within them have major chromosomal abnormalities,
confirming a high spontaneous incidence of mozaicism5.

Exposure in rats reduces the size of the sperm-storing organs.
The testes are shriveled, smaller, or can become a sac filled
with blood. Boys exposed in the womb to higher
concentrations of phthalates (diethyl, dibutyl benzyl, butyl
benzyl and diisobutyl) had shorter anogenital distances, smaller
penises and had testes that did not properly descend into the
scrotum (this suggests impaired production of testosterone)28.
One quarter of US women have body concentrations sufficient
to trigger theses effects.
Monobutyl phthalate and monbenzyl phathalate urine
concentrations in human males have already been inversely
associated with sperm count and motility. Malformations
increased with concentration14.
Phthalates are also associated with low birth weight 35.
DEHP exposure in children (from dust) is correlated with a 2.9
times rise in incidence of asthma. Other phthalates are
correlated with rhinitis and eczema. It appears that phthalates
can amplify the body’s response to allergy-causing
compounds20.
A study of 1450 adult men has shown that
higher phthalates in urine correlates with
obesity31.

Exposure to pesticides makes men less fertile.
Males exposed to TCDD (dioxin) in Seveso Italy are
permanently less likely to have male children. If
exposed before the age of 10, their sperm is feeble and
depleted. If exposed between 10 and 17, there is more
sperm with higher motility. When exposed as adults,
there is no obvious effect on sperm33.
There are plans under way (EPA) to assess the effect on
reproduction of endocrine disrupters of estrogen,
androgen and thyroid hormones. Because male embryos
are more delicate, environmental pollution may
contribute to the observed decrease in male births.
Phthalates are used as a softening
agent in PVC products (infusion bags).
The chemical (figure) most used and of
greatest concern is DEHP: di-2ethylhexyl phthalate. In infusion bags,
the chemical apparently protects blood
components from decay, possibly by inhibiting certain
reactions7.

F12.28. Epididymis in the rat. Unexposed (left) is more
than 3 times the size of that exposed to DBP (dibutyl
phthalate) in the womb.





The chemical is regulated in California since late 2003. It is expected to be
replaced by epsilon-caprolactone.

Epididymis is a cordlike structure on the posterior edge of the testes where
storage, transit and maturation of spermatozoa occurs.

12-16

FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME PHYSICAL ABNORMALITIES

12.10. Teratogenicity Examples

(Hermann Loser, University Children’s Clinic, Munster, Germany)

12.10.1. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome.

98%
84%
89%
80%
20%
20%
72%
58%
20%
95%
29%
10%
46%
25%
16%
51%
13%
9%
16%
30%
7%
7%
44%
12%
35%

F12.29. Facial Features of FAS.

Epicanthal folds
Small, widely spaced eyes
Flat midface
Short, upturned nose
Smooth, wide philtrum
Thin upper lip
Under-developed jaw
F12.30. Corpus Callosum difference
between normal (top) and alcoholexposed infants (bottom).

A cell-adhesion molecule called
L1 guides cell migration in the
developing brain. Alcohol
prevents cells guided by L1 from
adhering to each other. A single
episode of alcohol exposure
lasting 4 hours is enough to kill
groups of cells by interfering with
GABA, glutamate and serotonin.
Exposure to alcohol also
diminishes the size of the corpus
callosum in human infants
(F12.30).

are under normal height and weight
Microcephalic
Mental and Motor Retardation
Speech impediments
Hearing problems
Swallowing/Feeding problems
Hyperactive
Slack muscles
Autism/Aggressive/Social Problems
Facial anomalies
Heart defects
Kidney defects
Genital deformities
Eye problems
Bent crooked little finger
Shortened and bent little finger
Under-developed fingers
Hip deformities
Small teeth
Pigeon Chest
Concave chest
Cleft palate
Spinal dimple
Hernia
Hair growth on back of neck

12.10.2. Cigarettes
Women who smoke reach menopause sooner than nonsmokers, possibly because their supply of eggs is smaller.
It is likely that smoking before pregnancy or during nursing
also impairs the offspring’s supply of eggs.
In mice, weekly administration of benzo(a)pyrene and 7,12dimethyl-benz(a)anthracene over 3 weeks in doses representing
one pack of cigarettes per day caused offspring to have onethird fewer eggs. This happened whether the mother was

There have also been indications
in rat studies that alcohol consumption in mothers can increase
the risk of breast cancer in offspring22.
12-17

exposed before pregnancy or
during lactation. If exposed during
both periods, two-thirds of the
eggs were missing32.

12.10.4. Thalidomide
Thalidomide, originally developed as a sedative in 1957, was
widely used, particularly in England and Germany, to stem
morning sickness and nausea in pregnant women, with
dramatic consequences.
Thalidomide was not marketed in the US on the basis of a
handwritten memo by Frances Kelsey mentioning peripheral
neuritis symptoms in adults (a tingly numbness in the fingers).
7,000 children were born with phocomelia (seal limb) or
amelia (no limb) across Europe in the
early 1960s.

F12.31. Cigarette publicity.

The metabolite of nicotine
nitrosamino ketone (NNK, shown)
may increase the incidence of
cancer in the
offspring.
Women who complain of headaches or
breathing problems associated with
exposure to organic chemicals such as phenol, xylene, acetone
and trichloroethylene are much more likely to have premature
births or show birth defects in their offspring.

Thalidomide focused attention on
chemical-induced birth defects and led regulatory agencies to
introduce specific protocols to test for organ-specific
teratogenicity.
Given before or after a crucial time period (days 24-36 of
gestation), thalidomide has little effect, but during that 12 day
time span, when limb buds develop, the drug halts further
growth of long bones.

12.10.3. Sound
Postnatal growth in fetuses exposed to high levels (100 dB) of
continuous sound is slower in exposed than in controls. In rats,
exposure to pulsed noise for 7 hours induced serious
retardation of embryo growth (F12.32). A large variety of
resorptions were found.
F12.32. Sound-exposed mother’s fetus,
14 days post-conception, is at the bottom.
Persaud.

12.33. Phocomelia in a child. Marmoset (normal at left) and
Thalidomide-exposed between days 38 and 52 (at right). Rats and mice
would show no effects under the same exposure.
Essentials of Environmental Toxicology.

12-18

Thalidomide is a strong teratogen in humans, but a weak one in
animals. Aspirin is a strong teratogen in rats. It has also been
linked to miscarriage in women, although acetaminophen was
not19.Thalidomide is approved since 1998 to treat
complications of leprosy, and may be useful in the treatment of
multiple myeloma or myelodysplasias, blood cancers
notoriously resistant to chemotherapy as well as rheumatoid
arthritis, tuberculosis and AIDS4. Thalidomide-affected babies
continue to be born in developing countries where it is used for
the treatment of leprosy.
Thalidomide's actions are multiple and mysterious, but
probably require bio-activation, since the drug is largely
ineffective in vitro. A prominent anti-angiogenesis effect may
explain its teratogenicity (developing bones need extra
capillaries) as well as its effect in multiple myeloma
(squelching new blood vessel formation should starve cancer in
the bone marrow). Thalidomide is of interest because it
regulates TNF-TNF-encourages the demise of tumor cells.

vagina and cervix. The next generation of daughters may also
be affected. It was found in 1999 that DES suppresses the
activity of the Wnt-7a gene, influencing the development of
the male and female reproductive tracts. The repartition of
DES is not similar in the tissues of embryo and mother, a good
example of fetal compartmentalization (F12.35).

12.11. Delayed Effects on
the Fetus

F12.35. DES and metabolites in fetal and maternal tissues. Mattison.

12.11.1. Delayed Teratogen

Endocrine disruptors are a diverse class of chemicals (DDT,
DES, soy estrogens, atrazine, BPA and PCBs) who disturb
normal endocrine functions at very low concentrations, and
display unusual dose-responses, making their detection
difficult in experiments where large doses are typically used.
In adults, it is believed that interference with hormone action is
mostly reversible, but that it may not be in the developing fetus
or young child, permanently altering the organization of many
critical body tissues. Endocrine disruptors have effects on male
and female reproduction, breast development and cancer,
prostate cancer, neuroendocrinology, thyroid, metabolism and
obesity, and cardiovascular endocrinology. To study the neurodevelopmental impacts of endocrine disruptors, the volumes of

12.11.2. Endocrine Disruptors

F12.34. 1957 advertisement promoting DES.

Between 1940 and 1971, over 2
million women were given diethylstilbestrol, DES, the first synthetic version of estrogen, as a
treatment for high risk pregnancy. It was believed at the time
that insufficient amounts of estrogen led to miscarriage. DES
turned out to be a "delayed teratogen" in daughters between 17
and 22 years of age, inducing clear cell adenocarcinoma in the
12-19

sexually dimorphic nuclei (“SDN”) in the hypothalamus are
commonly used as a bio-marker.

 

 

 

Women who have had substantial exposure to endocrine
disruptors such as estrogen mimics are more likely to bear
sons who develop testicular cancer. The chemicals involved
are hexachlorobenzene, PCBs and chlordanes12.
A important estrogen disruptor is bisphenol A (BPA,
above), a precursor in the manufacture of polycarbonate
plastics, making them harder and more resilient, and epoxy
resins that line the interior of metallic cans. BPA easily
leaches into food containers when heated.
BPA mimics estrogen, and has been found in animal
studies to alter prostate gland size,
and shift the onset of sexual
maturity. It could cause
miscarriages and mental
retardation (Down’s syndrome)15
in humans, as well as insulin
resistance in mice27. BPA can also
alter brain formation in female
mouse fetuses, and later produce
male behavior in adult females at very small doses, 25
ng/kg.day. The average person’s daily exposure to

 
 

 

12-20

bisphenol A is similar to that dose29,41. BPA may produce
heart arrhythmias in females because at estrogen levels
typically found in premenopausal women, the addition of
BPA would spike vulnerability to arrhythmias, causing a
higher mortality rate after heart attacks in premenopausal
women, compared with men36. BPA may also produce
permanent damage to a gene important for reproduction,
HOXA10, by loss of a methyl group, permanently altering
its activity and rendering uterine tissue hypersensitive to
the effects of estrogen37. Exposures vary from 1 to 15
µg/kg.day, and urine and blood levels fluctuate following
consumption of fluids from BPA-containing polycarbonate
bottles. The US EPA reference dose is 50 µg/kg.
When released in the environment, ethynylestradiol from
birth control pills can alter the fertility of trout eggs at a
level of 10 ppt16.
Trace amounts of cadmium mimic estrogen and alter the
reproduction of female rats by binding to estrogen
receptors17.
Exposure to cortisol, a hormone that crosses the placenta
into the fetus, between the 5th and 7th week of gestation
elevated blood pressure in offspring by 15 mm of Hg. They
also had fewer nephrons in their kidneys25. Stress to
mothers reprograms a baby’s physiology, making it
susceptible to high blood pressure later in life.
The fungicide vinclozolin promotes an epigenetic
transgenerational phenotype involving a number of disease
states. Vinclozolin produces male infertility by acting
transiently at the anti-androgenic time of embryonic sex
determination to promote in the F1generation a
spermatogenic cell defect and subfertility in the male. This
phenotype was transferred through the male germ line to all
subsequent generations analyzed (up to F4)42.

T12.37. Semen Profile for Reproductive Toxicity.

Many troublesome substances originate in food. When
individuals were switched for 3 days from their normal
food sources to the same foods freshly sourced and
unpackaged, the levels of bisphenol A and a key phthalate in
their urine decreased by 65% and 53% respectively47.

from Chemical Exposures and Toxic Responses

Sperm concentration
Sperm viability
Vital stain
Hypo-osmotic swelling
Sperm Motility
Percent motile
Curvilinear velocity
Straight-line velocity
Linearity
Lateral head amplitude
Beat cross frequency
Sperm size and shape
Morphology
Morphometry
Semen parameters
pH
Volume
Marker chemicals from glands
Toxicant or metabolite concentrations

12.12. Types of Reproductive Studies
Because of the complexity of reproduction, diverse types and
lengths of experimental studies of toxicity can be conducted
(T12.36).
T12.36. Types of Reproductive Toxicity Studies
in Males and Females.
MALE
FEMALE
Sperm production study
Pre-Implantation Studies
Serial mating study
Single generation study
Extended mating study
Multiple generation study
Dominant lethal assay
Fertility in continuous breeding
In vitro tests
Teratogenicity

12.12.1. Single Generation Studies

In a Serial Mating Study, 50 females per male may be used.
Extended means that the agent is administered over 6
spermatogenic cycles (one cycle in the rat is 58 days).
In a Dominant Lethal Assay, the agent is dosed to result in fetal
lethality from genetic mutations.
In Fertility in Continuous Breeding, breeding is forced
throughout the lifetime of the animal.
There is a fundamental distinction between fertility studies and
teratogenicity studies.
Note that it is not easy to uncover reproductive toxicity in
males, in spite of a large number of available tests on semen
(T12.37).
The gold standard test is still whether healthy offspring can be
obtained.

Study formats can cover various Segments within a single
generation (F12.38).
12.12.2. Multiple Generation Studies
Multi-generation testing is justified on the basis of
(1) bio-accumulation under sustained exposure,
(2) recessive mutations that may not be apparent in the
first generation, and
(3) permanent epigenetic changes in the germ line
(sperm) that then transmits transgenerationally as adultonset diseases, even in the absence of any subsequent
exposure.

12-21

F12.38. Segment I, Segment II and Segment III reproductive studies.
Ecobichon.

An example of bio-accumulation is the recommendation by the
US FDA for studies up to 3 generations in the evaluation of the
effects of compounds ingested over long periods of time such
as color, food additives and pesticides, which may leave
residues in food-producing animals13. The details of such a
study are illustrated in F12.39.

12-22

F12.39. Multiple Generation Reproductive Test. In a typical 3-generation study, females ("F0") are bred with males, both treated before and
during mating, treatment beginning near puberty. The male and female offspring are further treated with the agent from weaning through the
mating period, and bred repeatedly.
Modified from Hayes, 2001

12-1

A case of recessive mutations is shown by a multigeneration
study in zera fish (F12.40).

An example of epigenetic changes is illustrated below
(F12.41). After F0 gestating female rats are transiently exposed
to pesticide (permethrin and insect repellant DEET), plastic
(bisphenol A and phthalates), hydrocarbon (jet fuel, JP8)
mixtures or dioxin (TCDD), the F1, F2 and F3 unexposed
generations were assessed for pubertal onset and gonadal
function.
The plastics, dioxin and jet fuel were found to promote earlyonset female puberty in F3. Spermatogenic cell apoptosis was
affected transgenerationally. Ovarian primordial follicle pool
size was significantly decreased with all treatments
transgenerationally.

F12.40. The need for multi-generation studies. To create mutant zebrafish, a
mutagen induces base-pair changes in DNA of developing sperm cells of a male fish (top left).
The mutated male breeds with a wild-type (+/+) female (top right) to produce offspring in the
F1 generation that carry the mutation (m). Since most mutations are recessive, the carrier (+/m)
will be indistinguishable from the wild-type form. The Fl carrier then mates with a
homozygous wild-type (+/+) to produce the F2 generation, which will consists of mutation
carriers (+/m) and homozygous wild-types (+/+). The F2 generation fish are interbred
randomly. Breeding pairs in the F2 generation that consist of two carriers (+/m) will produce
one homozygous (m/m) mutant for every three wild-type offspring. All other breeding-pair
combinations produce phenotypically wild-type offspring. Scientists must search through all
the embryos of the F3 generation to find the mutants. American Scientist, Sept-Oct 2006.

F12.41. DNA regions with different methylation were identified for the
various agents, and found to be widely distributed in the rat genome.
Chromosomal location of the transgenerational DNA Methylation Regions in F3 associated
with plastics (red arrow), dioxin (green arrow), hydrocarbon (blue arrow) and pesticide (black
arrow). The chromosome number and 2–5 megabase regions size are indicated.

12-2

Another examples of such transgenerational transmission is the
effect of tributyltin on obesity in the grand-children of exposed
mice, in spite of zero subsequent exposure48.

12.13. Toxicants of Sexual Maturity
Sexual maturation in girls is delayed by lead concentrations
ranging between 2 and 5 µg/dL, although the US limit in the
blood is 10 µg/dL18. The US Association of Occupational and
Environmental Clinics recommends intervention for pregnant
women at 5 µg/dL. Because lead crosses the placenta
unencumbered, neurobehavioral and cognitive deficits in
offspring are likely at 10 µg/dL, as well as preterm birth,
decreased gestational maturity, lower birth weight, reduced
postnatal growth, increased incidence of minor congenital
anomalies, early neurologic or neurobehavioral deficits, and
decreased intelligence at ages 3 to 7.

12.14. Alteration of Sexual Identity
The popular weed killer atrazine strips male frogs of a key
hormone and turns them into hermaphrodites10.

F12.42. Male mice experience two spikes in hormone production in
their lifetime. One begins during fetal development and another at puberty (top),

12.15. Developmental Testing In Vitro

The fetal testes begin to produce testosterone 11 or 12 days after conception, and
continue to do so until 4 or 5 days after birth.
In contrast, females normally experience only the second, pubertal increase in
estrogen concentrations (middle).
However, androgens from male littermates in the womb can diffuse into their sisters'
bloodstreams and influence their development (bottom).

In vitro techniques evaluate the three components of
developmental toxicity: maternal toxicity, embryo toxicity and
abnormal development. The maternal component can be
measured using a cytotoxicity test (3T3 cells), embryo toxicity
using a stem cell test, and abnormal development using
measurements of cell differentiation.
However, these tests have not gained wide acceptance because
validation work has not been performed. A difficulty with the
design of new tests is that the process of embryo development,
which involves proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation
together, is not well understood at the basic
level.

12.16. Agents under Investigation
Agents and Substances Reviewed for Reproductive Health
Effects by the Office of Technology Assessment
from Chemical Exposures and Toxic Responses

12-2

12.16.4. Biological Agents

12.16.1. Metals

Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, Hepatitis, Other infectious agents,
Recombinant DNA.

Lead, Boron, Manganese, Mercury, Cadmium, Arsenic, Antimony.

12.16.2. Chemicals

REFERENCES

Agricultural chemicals: Carbaryl, Dibromochloropropane (DBCP),
DDT, Kepone (Chlordecone), 2,4,5- T Dioxin (TCDD) and Agent
Orange, 2,4-D.
Polyhalogenated Biphenyls: Polybrominated biphenyls (PBB),
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PBC).
Organic Solvents: Carbon disulfide, Styrene, Benzene, Carbon
tetrachloride, Trichlorethylene.
Anesthetic Agents: Epichlorohydrin.
Ethylene oxide (EtO)
Formaldehyde
Rubber manufacturing: 1,3-Butadiene, Chloroprene, Ethylene
thiourea.
Vinyl halides: Vinyl chloride.
Undefined industrial exposures: Laboratory work, Oil, chemical and
atomic work, Pump and paper work, Textile work, Agriculture work.

1. Exposure to ethylene glycol ethers and spermatogenic disorders in man: a case-control study. Veulemans, H. et al. Br.
J. Indust. Med. 50, 71-78, 1993.
2. Congenital defects and work in pregnancy. McDonald, A.D. et al. Br. J. Indust. Med. 45, 581-588, 1988.
3. Thalidomide--a revival story. Raje, N., Anderson, K. NEJM 341, 1606-09, 1999.
4. Dark Remedy: the impact of thalidomide and its revival as a vital medicine. Stephens T, Brynner R. Perseus, 228 p.,
2001.
5. Chromosome analysis of blastomeres from human embryos by using comparative genomic hybridization. L. Slater H.
Williamson R. Wilton L. Human Genetics. 106(2):210-7, Feb 2000.
6. Semen quality after prenatal exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dibenzofurans. Guo YL. Hsu PC. Hsu CC.
Lambert GH. Lancet. 356(9237):1240-1, Oct 7 2000.
7. Administration of potentially antiandrogenic pesticides (procymidone, linuron, iprodione, chlozolinate, p, p' -DDE,
and ketoconazole) and toxic substances (dibutyl- and diethylhexyl phthalate, PCB 169, and ethane dimethane
sulphonate) during sexual differentiation produces diverse profiles of reproductive malformations in the male rat. Gray
Jr., E.L., et al. Toxicology and Industrial Health 15(January-March):94. 1999.
8. Prevention of T cell–driven complement activation and inflammation by tryptophan catabolism during pregnancy.
Mellor AL et al. Nature Immunology 2, 64 – 68, 2001.
9. Risk of adverse birth outcomes in populations living near
landfill sites. Elliott P et al. BMJ, vol 323, 363-368. 18th August 2001.
10. Hermaphroditic, demasculinized frogs after exposure to the herbicide atrazine at low ecologically relevant doses.
Hayes, T.B., et al. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99(April 16):5476-5480, 2002.
11. Medulloblastoma Growth Inhibition by Hedgehog Pathway Blockade. DM Berman et al. Science 2002 August 30;
297: 1559-1561.
12. Increased Concentrations of Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Hexachlorobenzene, and Chlordanes in Mothers of Men
with Testicular Cancer. Lennart Hardell et al. Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume 111, Number 7, June 2003.
13. Food and Drug Administration Advisory Committee on Protocols for Safety Evaluation. Panel on reproduction
studies in the safety evaluation of food additives and pesticide residues. Tox Appl Pharmacol. 1970; 16 : 264.
14. Phthalate Exposure and Human Semen Parameters. Duty S et al. Epidemiology. 14(3):269-277, May 2003.
15. Bisphenol A exposure causes meiotic aneuploidy in the female mouse. Hunt PA et al. Current Biology. 13(7):546-53;
2003.
16. Short-Term Exposure to 17α-Ethynylestradiol Decreases the Fertility of Sexually Maturing Male Rainbow Trout
(Oncorhynchus Mykiss). Schultz, Irvin R. et al. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry: Vol. 22, No. 6, pp. 1272–1280,
2003.
17. Cadmium mimics the in vivo effects of estrogen in the uterus and mammary gland. Johnson MD et al. Nature
Medicine, pp 1081 – 1084, August 2003.
18. Blood Lead Levels and Sexual Maturation in U.S. Girls: The Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 1988-1994. Wu T et al. Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume 111, Number 5, p. 737, May 2003.
19. Exposure to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs during pregnancy and risk of miscarriage: population based
cohort study. De-Kun Li et al. BMJ, 327: 368 – 0, 16th Aug 2003.
20. The Association between Asthma and Allergic Symptoms in Children and Phthalates in House Dust: A Nested CaseControl Study. Bornehag, CG et al., Environmental Health Perspectives 112:1393-1397, 2004.
21. Embryonic pig liver. pancreas. and lung as a source for transplantation: Optimal organogenesis without teratoma
depends on distinct time windows. S. Eventov-Friedman et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci. 102:2928-33 Feb. 22. 2005.
22. In utero alcohol exposure increases mammary tumorigenesis in rats. Clarke-Hilakivi, L., et al. British Journal of
Cancer 90 (June 1):2225-2231. 2004.
23. Brain gender: Prostaglandins have their say. Ottem, E.N., D.G. Zuloaga, and S.M. Breedlove. Nature Neuroscience
7(June):570-572. 2004.
24. Germline stem cells and follicular renewal in the postnatal mammalian ovary. Johnson, J. . . . and J.L. Tilly. Nature
428(March 11):145-150. 2004.
25. Preconception DDT and pregnancy loss: A prospective study using a biomarker of pregnancy. Venners, SA et al.
Hormone 2004 Conference. Oct. 27-30. New Orleans. 2004.

12.16.3. Physical Factors
Ionizing radiation: X-rays, Gamma rays.
Nonionizing radiation: Ultraviolet radiation, Laser, Visible light,
Infrared radiation, Radiofrequency/microwave, Ultrasound, Video
display terminals, Magnetic field, Hyperbaric/hypobaric
environments, Cold environments, Noise, Vibration.



Each increase in serum DDT of 10 ng/g of serum increases early
miscarriage by 17%25.

12-3

26. Effects of high maternal cortisol levels in early pregnancy in sheep. Wintour, E.M., et al. Experimental Biology 2002.
April 21. New Orleans. 2002.
27. The Estrogenic Effect of Bisphenol A disrupts Pancreatic β-Cell Function In Vivo and Induces Insulin Resistance.
Paloma Alonso-Magdalena et al. Environmental Health Perspectives Volume 114, Number 1, January 2006.
28. Decrease in Anogenital Distance among Male Infants with Prenatal Phthalate Exposure. Shanna H. Swan et al,
Environmental Health Perspectives Volume 113, Number 8, August 2005.
29. Evidence of altered brain sexual differentiation in mice exposed perinatally to low, environmentally relevant levels
of bisphenol A. Rubin BS et al. Endocrinology Vol. 147, No. 8 3681-3691, 2006.
30. Parental Heat Exposure and Risk of Childhood Brain Tumor: A Children's Oncology Group Study. American
Journal of Epidemiology 164(3):222-231, 2006.
31. Concentrations of urinary phthalate metabolites are associated with increased waist circumference and insulin
resistance in adult u.s. Males. Stahlhut RW, van Wijngaarden E, Dye TD, Cook S, Swan SH Environ Health Perspect.
115(6):876-82, June 2007.
32. Maternal exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons diminishes murine ovarian reserve via induction of
Harakiri. Jurisicova A et al. J Clin Invest. 2007 December 3; 117(12): 3971–3978.
33. Dioxin Exposure, from Infancy through Puberty, Produces Endocrine Disruption and Affects Human Semen
Quality. Mocarelli P et al. Environ Health Perspect. 2008 January; 116(1): 70–77.
34. Epididymis seleno-independent glutathione peroxidase 5 maintains sperm DNA integrity in mice. Chabory, E. et al.
2009. Journal of Clinical Investigation 119(July), online June 22 doi:10.1172/JCI38940.
35. Phthalate Levels and Low Birth Weight: A Nested Case-Control Study of Chinese Newborns. Zhang Y et al. 2009.
Journal of Pediatrics (in press).
36. Estrogen Receptor-Mediated Mechanisms Underlie Sex-Specificity of Rapid Actions of 17β-Estradiol and Bisphenol
A in Ventricular Myocytes (Abst. P2-56). Belcher SM et al. 2009. Endocrine Society annual meeting, Washington, D.C.
(June 13).
37. Serum Bisphenol A Concentrations Following Oral Adminstration in Adult Female CD-1 Mice (Abst. P2-66). Taylor
JA et al. 2009. Endocrine Society annual meeting, Washington, D.C. (June 11)
38 The influence of paternal age on Down Syndrome. Fisch H et al. , The Journal of Urology, June 2003, DOI:
10.1097/01.ju.0000067958.36077.d8
39. Epigenetic Transgenerational Actions of Endocrine Disruptors. Anway M. D. and Skinner M. K. Endocrinology
147(6) (Supplement):S43–S49. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-1058
40. Consequences of paternal cocaine exposure in mice. He F, Lidow IA, Lido MS. Neurotoxicology and Teratology 28
(2006) 198–209
41. Prenatal Bisphenol A Exposure and Early Childhood Behavior. Braun, J., . . . and B. Lanphear. 2009. Environmental
Health Perspectives (in press).
42. Epigenetic Transgenerational Actions of Endocrine Disruptors. Matthew D. Anway and Michael K. Skinner.
Endocrinology, 147: S43–S49, 2006.
43. Prenatal PCB exposures in Eastern Slovakia modify effects of social factors on birthweight. Sonneborn D, Park H-Y,
Petrik J, Kocan A, Palkovicova L, Trnovec T, Nguyen DV, Hertz-Picciotto I. Paediatr Perinatal Epidemiol 22(3):202-13, 2008.
44. Use of laptop computers connected to internet through Wi-Fi decreases human sperm motility and increases sperm
DNA fragmentation. Conrado Avendano MS, Ariela Mata MS, Cesar A Sanchez Sarmiento and Gustavo F. Doncel. Fertility
and Sterility Vol. 97, No. 1, January 2012. doi:10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.10.012
45. Relationship between sperm ATP content and motility of carp spermatozoa. G. Perchec, C. Jeulin, J. Cosson, F. André
and R. Billard. Journal of Cell Science 108, 747-753(1995).
46. Extra-Low-Frequency Magnetic Fields alter Cancer Cells through Metabolic Restriction. Ying Li and Paul Héroux.
2012. http://arXiv.org/abs/1209.5754
47. Food Packaging and Bisphenol A and Bis (2–Ethyhexyl) Phthalate Exposure: Findings from a
Dietary Intervention. Rudel RA, Gray JM, Engel CL, Rawsthorne TW, Dodson RE, Ackerman JM, et al.
Environ Health Perspect 2011;119:914–20.
48. Transgenerational inheritance of increased fat depot size, stem cell reprogramming and hepatic steatosis elicited by
prenatal exposure to the obesogen tributyltin in mice. R. Chamorro-García et al. Environmental Health Perspectives.
Published online January 15, 2013.

12-4

13.1. Working Structure of Genes .3
13.2. Genetic Homogeneity of Organisms . 3
13.3. Genetic Homogeneity among Cells . 4
13.4. Karyotype Evaluation .5
13.5. Chromosome Nomenclature .5
13.6. DNA Stability. 5
13.6.1. Mutation Resistance of the Genetic Code .7
13.7. DNA Damage . 8
13.7.1.1. Due to Toxicants .9
13.7.1.2. DNA Adducts . 10
13.8. DNA Protection . 10
13.9. DNA Repair . 11
13.9.1. DNA Repair Mechanisms . 11
13.9.2. DNA repair: p53 . 11
13.10. Mutagenesis in Somatic and Germ Cells . 12
13.10.1. Somatic mutation . 12
13.10.2. Germinal mutation . 12
13.11. Consequences of Mutagenic Events . 12
13.11.1. Macro-Lesions . 13
13.11.1.1. In Normal Reproduction . 13
13.11.1.2. In Abnormal Reproduction . 13
13.11.1.2.1. Polyploidy . 14
13.11.1.2.2. Aneuploidy: monosomy and trisomy . 14
13.11.1.2.3. Structural chromosome aberrations . 14
13.11.2. Micro-Lesions . 15
13.11.3. Examples of Micro-Lesions . 15
13.11.3.1. Occurring Naturally. 15
13.11.4. Genetic Therapy. 16
13.12. Risks of Recessive Mutations . 16

13.13. Mutagenicity Testing . 16
13.13.1. Testing with Prokaryotic Cells . 17
13.13.1.1. Ames Test (prokaryotes in vitro). 17
13.13.1.2. Problems of the Ames Test . 18
13.13.2. Testing with Eukaryotic Cells . 19
13.13.3. Sister Chromatid Exchange (mammalian cells in
vitro). 19
13.13.4. Micronuclei (eukaryotes in vivo) . 20
13.13.5. Comet Test (in vivo) . 20
13.13.6. Genetic MicroArray Testing . 20
13.14. Test Batteries in Mutagenic Testing . 21
13.15. Cancer and Mutation . 21
13.16. Genotoxicity to Carcinogenicity . 21
13.17. Apoptosis . 22

13-1

13.

Between humans and chimpanzees, genes are the same 96% of
the time. Different degrees of gene duplication account for
2.7% of differences, and single pair differences for 1.2%. Most
human genes are present in 0 to 5 copies per person, but a few
genes may vary between 5 and 36815.

The importance of genetics in the contemporary scientific
literature is overplayed, because the field of genetics is young
and dynamic. Genes probably have the same importance in
living systems that libraries have in society.

Individual humans are very similar at the genomic level. Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), one nucleotide variations,
occur in 0.1% of the genome. Structural Variations, involving
larger amounts of DNA (repeats, translocations, truncations or
deletions) involve 0.5% more of the genome.
The average person has defective copies of 250 to 300 genes,
and 75 of those are associated with diseases15.

Only 5% of the mammalian genome is highly
conserved, and therefore of some “important” use. Of
the “important” 5%, only 1.5% encodes proteins
(exons), 3.5% performing other biological functions,
such as gene regulation. One famous noncoding RNA,
XIST, acts to shut down one of the X chromosomes in
females. The expressed 1.5% is made of 23,000 genes.
The water flea, Daphnia pulex, has 31,000 genes, rice has
37,000. Still, 63% of DNA is copied to RNA16, but not into
proteins, which until now have been viewed as the main actors
in biological function. Perhaps this reflects the limits of our
understanding of genetics.

Among the introns (the 98.5% that is not expressed), 68% has
no known function at this time, 28% codes for protein, 5% is
untranslated regulatory code and 4% is conserved among
vertebrates. Most introns are very old, and they haven't
changed very much in slowly-evolving branches of life, such as
vertebrates.
Some believe that part of the unexpressed code is involved in
the management of embryonic development 8. Some other
segments may control the expression of protein through
microRNAs. Still, other unexpressed parts could contain
hidden genetic diversity that can erupt from within when
conditions change, giving the organism a genetic reserve12.
Some introns could be functional spacers or inevitable junk left
from the processes by which genomes evolve.

 

2-3 pg of DNA in the
nucleus
  2 m in length (unwound,
as shown at left)
  23,000 genes
  2.5 x 109 base pairs
  8-10% of base pairs are
highly repetitive
sequences
  20% are moderately
repetitive

The mutation rate of male DNA is twice that of females.
Since 8% of the human genome consists of DNA of viral
origin, could viruses be viewed as agents of human evolution?

T13.8. Nucleic Acid in
Human Cells.
13-2

Genetics has until now concentrated on the structural aspects as
opposed to the functional aspects of genes, because structure
can be observed more easily. But DNA should not be thought
of as a static structure. Genetic code evolves from mutations
and from the genetic variations associated with reproduction,
but there are other mechanisms of spontaneous genetic
evolution.

13.2. Genetic Homogeneity of Organisms
Even healthy people have large gains or losses of DNA. 65 to
80% of people have copy number variations that run at least
100,000 bases long. In about 10% of DNA, long stretches can
be deleted, duplicated, often many times, or written
backwards17. Genomic mechanisms may actually predispose us
to such changes.

Since each gene can code for more than one protein, 200,000 to
500,000 different proteins are expected. Post-translational
modifications to proteins such as acetylation, glycosylation and
phosphorylation can also increase the number of distinct
structures. In addition, genomics does not obviously reflect that
in order to carry out their cellular roles, many proteins rely on
interactions with other proteins or on the formation of
complexes.

Single organisms can also express more than one genotype.
They are then called "mozaics". A British geneticist, Mary
Lyon, observed that in all females, one of the X chromosomes
is inactivated by adhering RNA (from the gene Xist), forming
the Barr body (this is used to confirm womanhood under the
microscope). But how is it possible to inactivate the same X
chromosome (of the two available) in all cells of the body?
Lyon’s observation is that the choice for inactivation among
the two X chromosomes is actually random, occurring after 9
rounds of mitosis. Females are therefore made of 512 (29)
different parts, each part being randomly father-X or mother-X:
all females are mozaics. In human females, this was
confirmed by variations in the expression of the G6PD gene
(responsible for breaking down of sugars in erythrocytes, in
particular).
Mosaicism can be observed by eye in some species when
pigmentation is X-chromosome-based. In multi-colored calico
cats, a gene determining whether fur is orange or black resides
on chromosome X. A different gene account for the white
areas.

13.1. Working Structure of Genes
Most of the time, in most cells of the body, 90% of genes are
silenced by histone structures, locked away within the
compacted but orderly material that makes up chromosomes.
The unicellular ciliates have two types of nuclei in the same
cell. A small nucleus contains the whole diploid genome. A
larger one is copied from the small one, but containing only the
27,000 working genes of the genome, the exons, which code
for protein. The introns are absent from this macronucleus. In
the macronucleus, every gene ends up as a separate minichromosome, and is copied into about a thousand replicas.
Both nuclei divide in mitosis.
Such sophisticated mechanisms to protect the genome are not
present in humans.

F13.1. Calico Cat.

As if females did not have
enough genetic diversity, it has
been recently recognized that females often harbor cells from
13-3

their mothers, as well as from their children (whether they are
males or female), possibly adding to immune system confusion
in females.

Chromosomes in Cultured Cells
Number of Cells per 50

50

How did the X and Y chromosome configuration come about?
Apparently, over evolutionary periods, there was failure of
recombination between the X and Y genes from spontaneously
occurring changes. Some XY crossing over occurs during male
meiosis, but 95% of the Y chromosome is on its own, having
no code with which to recombine. Presumably, in males,
readjustment of X genes expression compensates for having
one, rather than two copies. Major segments of the Y
chromosome were only sequenced, with great difficulty, in
2003. A gene on the Y chromosome, Sry, is important in the
regulation of dopamine. It is believed that men and women
have distinctive dopamine-regulating systems, perhaps
explaining partially psychological differences between the
sexes.
At the level of the genes, simple features can account for most
of gene-based evolution, even without the creation of new
innovative code:
1. down-regulation can occur through destructive
mutation,
2. up-regulation can occur through a stuttering
mechanism, repeating the same sequence more than
once13, and
3. plagiarism, using the sequences of other life forms.

40
IMR -90
A549

30
20
10
0
34

40
37

46
43

52
49

58
55

64
61

70
67

76
73

82
79

88
85

91

94 100
97

Chromosome Number

F13.2. Chromosome numbers in human cells grown in culture. IMR-90
is a human lung diploid fibroblast strain, A549 is a human lung
carcinoma. Data from ATCC.

probability of dying. Mutations occur when the DNA
alterations propagate in subsequent generations of cells.
Cells in culture have somewhat less regular chromosome
numbers (normal is 46) than body cells, as shown in red in
F13.2. These irregularities can be caused by defects in the
architecture of the mitotic apparatus, which controls the
migration of chromosomes to daughter cells.
Cancer cells, by contrast, most often have a hyperdiploid
karyotype (an excess number of chromosomes, green in F13.2).
Individual cells of a given cancer cell line differ in properties
such as metastatic capacity, transplantability, antigenic
makeup, drug sensitivity, growth rate, metabolism, and
morphology.
Using transformed Chinese Hamster Embryo cells, it was
shown5 that the number of genes altered at a rate of more than
3% per cell division. It therefore seems that cancer cells have
the ability to spontaneously generate genetic variants.

13.3. Genetic Homogeneity among Cells
In normal cells in vivo, the chromosome number is though to
be relatively constant, although in certain tissues such as the
liver, many cells have two nuclei, and some of the nuclei are
tetraploid. When the genome is altered, the cell has a high
13-4

The genetic variations are not limited to chromosome numbers.
F13.3 shows an extremely high rate of translocations in cancer
cells using the technique called spectral karyotyping. This
method allows the coloring of chromosomes in individual
colors using a combination of fluorescent dyes.
It is believed that this genetic variability may enhance the
survivability of tumors in the face of environmental changes,
including chemotherapy.

13.5. Chromosome Nomenclature
The banding pattern of chromosomes is developed using dyes:
Quinacrine or Giemsa are frequently used. The R stain is a
fluorescent label, inverse of Q or G.
The labeling nomenclature is illustrated for chromosome 9
(F13.7). The letter “p” is used for the small arm of
chromosomes (“petit”). A genome labeled “9p-” would be
missing one of the small arms of chromosome 9.
Chromosome numbers are quite different among species, as
shown in T13.5. For example, sex is determined among
humans according to the formula: XX = female and XY =
male. The platypus has 5 pairs of chromosomes that determine
its sex (X1X2X3X4X5X6X7X8X9X10 = female and
X1Y1X2Y2X3Y3X4Y4X5Y5 = male).

F13.3. Human mitotic chromosomes from a
primary tumor are colored with dyes (SKY). The
high rate of translocations is indicated by mixed
color on the same chromosome. Over 30
translocation events can be detected. 6

13.4. Karyotype Evaluation

13.6. DNA Stability

How do we assess a person’s general
genetic state? There are simple laboratory
techniques to achieve this (F13.4) using
white blood cells from the blood.
Colcemid (F13.4) is a chemical which interferes with the
mitotic process, stopping mitosis in metaphase. Colcemid
allows the observation, identification and size measurement of
chromosomes, and comparison with known human templates
(F13.4).
The chromosomes can be stained for the recognition of bands
(F13.6). Further, molecular probes can be mixed with DNA
homogenates, attached fluorescent labels becoming visible
when bound to matching DNA segments. Because each probe
only covers a short DNA segment, a large number of probes is
needed for detailed recognition of genetic state.

Evolution put in place mechanisms to stabilize genes and
improve the fidelity of genetic inheritance:
double-stranded DNA as opposed to the older singlestranded RNA,
error-checking by DNA polymerase: excision and
recombination repair, and
bi-parental inheritance (sex) to provided genetic
diversity within meiosis (a method of shuffling genes)
without the need for high rates of mutation.



Any toxic disruption to the mitotic apparatus can lead to gross chromosomal
aberrations, for example changes in chromosome numbers (see 13.2).

13-5

F13.6. Human Chromosomes. Cummings.
F13.4. Determining Human Heredity. Cummings.
T13.5. Chromosome numbers in various species.
Homo sapiens (human)
Mus musculus (house mouse)
Zea mays (corn or maize)
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)
Xenopus laevis (South African clawed frog)
Caenorhabditis elegans (microscopic roundworm)
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast)
Canis familiaris (domestic dog)
Arabidopsis thaliana (plant in the mustard family)
Muntiacus reevesi (Chinese muntjac, a deer)
Muntiacus muntjac (its Indian cousin)
Myrmecia pilosula (ant)
Parascaris equorum var. univalens (parasitic roundworm)
Cambarus clarkii (crayfish)
Equisetum arvense (field horsetail, a plant)
Platypus (duck-billed, egg-laying Australian mammal)

46
40
20
8
36
12
32
78
10
23
6
2
2
200
216

52

F13.7. Human Chromosome 9. Cummings.

There is a correlation between genome size and cell size among various species.

13-6

13.6.1. Mutation Resistance of the Genetic
Code

First
Base
U

It is useful to review the basic genetic mechanisms of
transcription and translation (F13.8) and the translation code
(F13.9).

C

F13.8. Transcription and
translation.
Essentials of Environmental Toxicology.

A

The translation code (below) is
slightly different in
mitochondria.
Note the apparent redundancy in
the code (64 combinations
possible, 20 amino acids used).
“Synonymous” codons may not
be completely equivalent: the
choice on one over the other may relate to how common the
matching transfer RNA is. If the
transfer RNA is rare, the transcription of the codon will be
slowed. This pace-setting may affect protein folding.
For example, the mutant codon C3435T of the MDR1 gene
codes for isoleucine within P-glycoprotein. Synonymous
C3435T codons are associated with above or below average
effectiveness in pumping toxicants out of cells. P-glycoprotein
is particularly important in determining the drug resistance of
cancer cells14.
Natural selection would favor a genetic code that includes fault
tolerance, that is, information can still be accurately recovered
in case of error. You will note in T13.9 that similar amino acid
names (in blue) are clustered, so that the third base is often
irrelevant: the same amino acid is coded in spite of third base
changes.

T13.9. Translation Code of Bases to Amino Acids
Second Base
U
C
A
G
UUU Phe UCU Ser
UAU Tyr UGU Cys
UUC Phe UCC Ser
UAC Tyr UGC Cys
UUA Leu UCA Ser
UAA STOP UGA STOP
UUG Leu UCG Ser
UAG STOP UGG Trp
CUU Leu CCU Pro
CAU His
CGU Arg
CUC Leu CCC Pro
CAC His
CGC Arg
CUA Leu CCA Pro
CAA Gln CGA Arg
CUG Leu CCG Pro
CAG Gln CGG Arg
AUU Ile
ACU Thr AAU Asn AGU Ser
AUC Ile
ACC Thr
AAC Asn AGC Ser
AUA Ile
ACA Thr AAA Lys AGA Arg
AUG Met
ACG Thr AAG Lys AGG Arg

Third
Base
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G

or START

G

GUU Val
GUC Val
GUA Val
GUG Val

GCU Ala
GCC Ala
GCA Ala
GCG Ala

GAU Asp
GAC Asp
GAA Glu
GAG Glu

GGU Gly
GGC Gly
GGA Gly
GGG Gly

U
C
A
G

Phenylalanine, Leucine, Isoleucine, Methionine, Valine, Serine, Proline, Threonine,
Alanine, Tyrosine, Histidine, Glycine, Asparagine, Lysine, Aspartic acid, Glutamic
acid, Cysteine, Tryptophan, Arginine, Serine, Arginine, Glycine.

If we look at the genetic code in detail, we find that whenever a
single coding change does NOT yield the same amino acid, it
still has a good chance of coding for one with similar
hydrophobicity. All the codons with a middle U correspond to
hydrophobic amino acids, which is critical in determining how
the protein folds.
Nature “knows” from evolution that level of hydrophobicity is
critical, even at the most basic level: at least 2/3 of the time, a
13-7

point mutation will either leave the amino acid unchanged or
substitute another similarly hydrophobic amino acid. The
genetic code itself is designed to protect hydrophobicity
information.
The genetic code is optimized to conserve hydrophobicity
specification, well ahead of other variables, such as electric
charge11.
If the wrong base is inserted by the molecular machinery
(T13.10, top) in the process of copying DNA, errors in protein
can result. Some toxicants, like hydroxyurea, can produce
errors by producing an imbalance in the pool of intracellular
DNA precursors.
A “non-coding” error can also occur when base analogues,
which cannot serve as a template in replication, are included in
DNA strands.
Not all mutations have equivalent effects. T13.10 illustrates
various examples of base mutations and their effects on the
coded protein.
Changes in the coding of a protein may have consequences on
the secondary or tertiary structure of a protein, or not at all. A
protein product may interact with a single other molecule, or
with dozens of them (for example, in a ribosome). It is
presumed that molecules that interact with many others have a
more critical structure.
But the normal copying, maintenance and transcription of
DNA is a fallible process, due to endogenous damaging agents,
including metabolites acting as alkylating agents and the ROS
(Reactive Oxygen Species) that arise during respiration.
About ten thousand DNA lesions per day per cell are
spontaneously produced.Although most of the genetic code in
made of non-coding introns, consequential alterations to the
code are still frequent. Mutation rates vary from about 10 -4 to
10-7, according to the site. Accurate mutation rates for specific
mutations are available from epidemiology.

T13.10. Amino Acid alterations from Codon mutations.

Codon Sequence:
-UUU-AAG-UAU-GGC-UAA
Amino Acid Sequence:
-Phe---Lys---Tyr---Gly---Stop
Alterations: Single Base Substitution (in red)
No Effect on
UUU AAG
UAC
GGC
UAA
AA Sequence
Phe
Lys
Tyr
Gly
Stop
Missense
UUU AAU
UAU
GGC
UAA
(change in AA)
Phe
Tyr
Gly
Stop
Asn
Nonsense
UUU AAG
UAA
GGC
UAA
(early stop)
Phe
Lys
Stop
Alterations: Base Deletion (of A) or Insertion (of U)
Frameshift with UUU A ↑GU AUG
GCU
AA?
missense
Phe
???
Ser
Met
Ala
Frameshift with UUU
UAA
GUA
UGG
CUA
nonsense
Phe
Stop
Alterations: Codon Insertion (of GUU) or Deletion (of AAG)
UUU AAG
UAU
GGC
GUU
Insertion
Phe
Lys
Tyr
Gly
Val
UUU UAU
GGC
UAA
Deletion
Phe
Tyr
Gly
Stop
The mutations, if not lethal, will be reproduced in downstream
cells. Such DNA alterations can give rise to congenital
anomalies.

13.7. DNA Damage
The major forms of DNA damage include SSB (Single-strand
Breaks), DSB (Double-strand Breaks), alteration of bases,
mispairing in the A-T and G-C bonds, hydrolytic depurination,
hydrolytic deamination of cytosine and 5-methylcytosine
bases, formation of covalent adducts with DNA, and oxidative
damage to bases and to the phosphodiester backbone of DNA.

13-8

Examples of agents capable of creating a range of lesions are
shown in T13.11.
Environmental DNA-damaging agents include UV light and
ionizing radiation, as well as a variety of toxicants encountered
in foodstuffs, air and water. Electrophyllic molecules in their
native form, or from bio-transformation are the most frequent
cause of damage. Free radicals and activated molecules result
from intoxication as well as normal metabolism. A group of
chemicals called base analogues substitute legitimate bases,
inducing a coding error.
13.7.1.1. Due to Toxicants

In some cases, the exact site of mutations on the DNA is
known for specific toxicants, as shown in the following table.
T13.11. The effects of selected physical and chemical mutagens.

Mutagen
Ultraviolet radiation
X rays

Effect on DNA/RNA
C, T, and U dimers that
cause base substitutions,
deletions, and insertions

Type of mutation
No effect, missense, or
nonsense

Breaks in DNA

Chromosomal
rearrangements and
deletions

Adds or deletes a
nucleotide

Missense or nonsense

Acridines (tricyclic
present in dyes)
F13.12. Chromosome breaks (arrows) by X-rays in Chinese
Hamster Ovary Cells. Casarett & Doull.
Alkylating agents
5-Bromouracil

Interferes with
specificity of base
pairing (e.g., C with T or
A, instead of G)

No effect, missense, or
nonsense

Pairs with A and G,
replacing AT with GC,
or GC with AT

No effect, missense, or
nonsense

13-9

T13.13. Toxic Chemicals Reaction Sites on DNA.

Agent

Methyl
Nitroso
Urea
Benzyl
Chloride
N-Acetoxy
Acetyl-amino
Fluorene
d-7,8-dihydroxy9,10-oxy-7,8,9,10Tetrahydro
Benzo(a)pyrene

Structure

Sites
N3,N7,O6 of
Guanine,
N1,N3,N7 of
Adenine,
N3 of Cytosine,
Phosphate
N7,N2,O6,C5
of Guanine
C8 of Guanine
and Adenine
N2 and O6
of Guanine,
N6 of Adenine

F13.14. Formation of a DNA Adduct from a Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbon. Harris, 1978, Academic Press.

13.7.1.2. DNA Adducts

13.8. DNA Protection

Exposure to various agents may result in diverse, structurally
heterogeneous adducts being added to DNA. In this case, the
structure of DNA is altered by the covalent addition of
molecular species. A subset of these adducts can contribute to
carcinogenicity.

Many lesions to DNA and other living tissues can be attenuated
using antioxidants. Natural antioxidants may be produced
endogenously, and also occur in
food (vitamins C, E). But very
powerful anti-oxidants, such as
the injected drug amifostine
(WR-2731, shown) are used for protection against medical
therapies such as cisplatin and radiation treatment. In the case
of this drug, it is believed that it is present in normal cells at a
concentration 100 times higher than in cancer cells.
Many of these compounds tend to concentrate in the
mitochondria and in the nucleus.

Some adducts, such as methylation may be reversible and play
a part in normal physiology (gene silencing). In animals, 2 to
7% of cytosines are normally methylated. Methylation patterns
are heritable from generation to generation, and are tissue
specific. Modulation within tissues is accomplished by the
action of demethylases.

13-10

13.9. DNA Repair

The process of thymidine dimer repair can be stimulated by
skin application of thymidine dinucleotide, a DNA snippet of
just two nucleotides. Apparently, there a cellular detection of
DNA debris which triggers DNA repair mechanisms10.

13.9.1. DNA Repair Mechanisms
There are more than 100 genes in our genome devoted to
detecting and repairing DNA damage. DNA repair enzymes
continuously monitor chromosomes to correct damaged
nucleotide residues. Failure to repair DNA lesions may result
in blockages of transcription and replication, mutagenesis, and
cellular cytotoxicity.
The vast majorities of the lesions are repaired by:

13.9.2. DNA repair: p53

BER (Base Excision Repair),
NER (Nucleotide Excision Repair), and
MMR (Mismatch Repair)
DNA polymerase (shown), the
enzyme of replication, can move
backwards on the DNA strand and
perform exonuclease digestion of a
sequence surrounding an incorrectly
matched base-pair. Exons may be
preferentially repaired (by
comparison with introns).
For example, in excision repair, thymidine dimers which can
be formed by UV exposure are repaired by excision, followed
by -polymerase and finally by DNA ligase which seals the
gap.

p53 (shown) designates
both a universal stress
responder gene and a
protein product within
cells. One of the best
known mechanisms known
to lead to cancer is damage
to the p53 gene and
consequently to the supply
of p53 protein. The p53
gene is normally silent, but
is turned on by DNA
damage. When triggered, it
halts cell division, making
time for repairs. If the
repairs are not successful,
p53 can also induce
apoptosis.

Sunlight-induced Xeroderma Pigmentosum is a disease of
DNA repair mechanisms (autosomal recessive). Individuals are
extremely sensitive to sunlight and usually die early of some
form of cancer.
There is a continuous competition between DNA mutation and
repair in living organisms.
13-11

Beyond such natural DNA repair, there is therapeutic repair.
When a patient has leukemia, it is possible to remove his bone
marrow completely (using radiation and chemicals), and
replace it with an autologous graft (the person’s own marrow,
purified of cancer cells outside the body) or that of a sibling or
matched donor (allograft). The modification of hematopoietic
stem cells by bone marrow transplant allows the stable genetic
modification of an entire organ, the blood.

If the cell divides or proliferates, this creates a sub-group of
altered cells. In the case of mutation of somatic cells, one cell,
and eventually one tissue, and finally the organism can be
affected (tumor).

13.10. Mutagenesis in Somatic and Germ
Cells

The whole organism is mutated (all tissues). Mutation can also
occur at the blastocyst stage in the course of gestation,
affecting part of the cells of an organism. Early in
development, germline cells migrate away from the other cells
in the embryo, and follow a special “program”. Later, they
migrate back into the location in the embryo where the sex
organs will form.

13.10.2. Germinal mutation
change from the original parental code which
is passed on to the organism's offspring.

As illustrated in F13.15, there are two streams of genetic
mutation:
13.10.1. Somatic mutation
is a change from the original parental code which
is passed on to the cell's offspring.

13.11. Consequences of Mutagenic Events
F13.16 shows the scenarios resulting from mutations. There
may be changes in the number of chromosomes, chromosome
breakages (shortened or lengthened), including exchanges
between segments of chromosomes (which may not lead to
functional trouble), and micro lesions: code mutations where
the base-pairs are altered.
Note: the term clastogen refers to a chemical with the ability to
break chromosomes apart.
Radiation is the best studied example of a dose-dependent
mutagen.
Generally, any free radical has an unpaired electron with the
ability to create chemical instability. This instability is well
correlated with mutagenic and carcinogenic potency. Cancer
originates, so to speak, from a quantum mechanical need for an
extra electron.

F13.15. Mutagenic events. Williams and Burson.

13-12

T13.17. MUTATIONS IN GERM CELLS

Genetic Disease or Condition
Dyslexia
Manic depression
Schizophrenia
Juvenile diabetes
Adult polycystic kidney
disease disease
Familial Alzheimer's
Multiple sclerosis
AAT deficiency (emphysema)
Myotonic muscular dystrophy
Fragile X chromosome
syndrome
Sickle
cell anemia
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Cystic fibrosis
Huntington's chorea
Hemophilia
Phenylketonuria
Retinoblastoma (childhood eye cancer)

F13.16. Consequences of Mutagenic events. Williams and Burson.

About 5000 diseases in humans are presently known to be
caused by defective genes (T13.17). Defective genes account
for 20% of infant mortalities, half of miscarriages and 80% of
mental retardation cases.

Cases in the US
15,000,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
500,000
250,000
250,000
120,000
100,000
100,000
65,000
32,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
16,000
10,000

vanDelft, Mutation Research, 1998

13.11.1. Macro-Lesions
Those are large scale changes in chromosome number or
structure. Many cancer cells thought to have a normal genotype
have in fact genes where large parts have been recombined.

seems insufficient to satisfy evolutionary needs). There is
intimate twisting of homologous chromosomes in meiosis.
If the process is completed without a hitch, no mutations occur,
just homologous code exchange. When something goes wrong,
the fertilized egg often dies.

13.11.1.1. In Normal Reproduction

Meiosis, in which the number of chromosomes is halved,
involves a random distribution of chromosomes pairs into
zygotes, as well as recombination between chromosome pairs
(223 possibilities among whole chromosome combinations

13.11.1.2. In Abnormal Reproduction

Cell nuclei with altered chromosome numbers can be polyploid
or aneuploid.



Recombination between chromosome pairs allows segments of maternal
and paternal chromosomes to be exchanged.

13-13

F13.20. Trisomy 13 or Patau syndrome. Lethal, cleft lip and
palate, small eyes, mean survival 6 months. Cummings.

13.11.1.2.1. Polyploidy

Polyploidies (= many copies of all genes) that are possible in
humans are triploid and tetraploid. Triploid occurs when two
sperm make it at the same time to the egg (F13.18).

F13.21. Trisomy 18 or Edwards syndrome.
Lethal, means survival 3 months. Cummings.

F13.22. Trisomy 21 or Down syndrome.
Straight hair, flattened face, open mouth with
large tongue, upward slanting eyes with
epicanthal folds. Few reach 50 years of age.
Gelerhter.

abdominal wall, with a variable chromosome number:
47-XXY or XXX, 48-XXYY, XXXY, 49-XXXXY.
Do you know who is the well known person (F13.23)
probably afflicted by the syndrome?
F13.23. From 1350 BC, Klinefelter syndrome. Cummings.
F13.18. Triploid human infant.
Lethal, enlarged head.

13.19. Lost trisomies in humans.

13.11.1.2.3. Structural chromosome aberrations

Cummings.

Chromatid breaks, deletions and rearrangements also
occur. Breaks and most deletions are lethal.

13.11.1.2.2. Aneuploidy : monosomy and trisomy

Monosomies (a single chromosome rather than two) are lost
very early. A few trisomies (three chromosome rather than
two) are survivable, as long as not all chromosomes are
involved, but most trisomies result in abortions (F13.19).
Most frequent are Patau syndrome (trisomy 13, F13.20),
Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18, F13.21) and Down syndrome
(trisomy 21, F13.22).
Anomalies are also possible in the sex chromosomes.
Klinefelter syndrome is rather frequent (1 in 1000 male births)
and characterized by minor breast development and sagging


Viable deletions:
Cri-du-chat: 5p-. Infants have catlike cry,
facial anomalies, severe mental retardation.
Retinoblastoma: 13q-. Cancer of the eye.
Rearrangements are part of the normal process of meiosis,
and are often not deleterious, since no genetic material is lost.
But note that 5% of Down syndrome cases involve genetic
translocations.

Changes in the normal number of single chromosomes.

13-14

13.11.2. Micro-Lesions
F13.25. Testicular
feminization victim. Cummings.

F13.24. Probability of base pair deletions.

Testicular feminization
is an X-chromosomelinked recessive disorder
which causes XY
individuals to develop into
phenotypic (very
attractive) females because
of insensitivity to
testosterone: they have a
defective nuclear
testosterone receptor.
Subjects usually have
testes hidden in the inguinal region, lack pubic hair and do
not menstruate. They progressively turn into males over
time (F13.25).

Vogel.

Smaller mutations to the base pairs tend to be more frequent
than larger ones (F13.24). Most of these mutations are
recessive. The rates of the small mutations can be used as a
clock to analyze evolutionary divergence in the chromosomes
of cells or mitochondria (where the mutation rate is higher).

Methylation. The term methylation refers to the addition
of a methyl group to the cyclic carbon 5 of a cytosine
nucleotide. A family of conserved DNA methyltransferases
catalyzes this reaction. Basically, the methyl group tags a
gene so it is turned off, and an unnecessary protein product
is not produced in a particular cell. For instance, one of the
two X chromosomes in female mammals is inactivated by
methylation.

13.11.3. Examples of Micro-Lesions
13.11.3.1. Occurring Naturally

A single point mutation with a frequency of 5 x 10 -6 is
Marfan’s syndrome, a dominant mutation of the gene
for collagen with variable penetration. A classic sign is
arachnidodactyly, and frequent aneurysm of the aorta.


Generally, receptors for water-soluble substances are on the cell
membrane, whereas receptors for fat-soluble substances are in the cytosol or
in the nuclear membrane.

A point mutation is believed responsible for cystic
fibrosis. The mutation alters the coding of a functional
part of a cell receptor for chlorine in lung tissue.
13-15

13.11.4. Genetic Therapy

true for all autosomes). The presence of a deleterious recessive
mutation would be detected as an increased rate of disease
from an agent affecting the dominant gene. Because of this
mechanism, there is potential for an unrecognized
degeneration of the gene pool from apparently inoffensive
toxicants.
Preservation of the genome depends on our understanding of it.
Because exons are actually expressed, at least some of their
mutations would be detected. Since introns are processed out,
how do we detect mutations in introns, and can we guarantee
that they have no subtle role in species-level health?
Is the redundancy of the genetic code a true redundancy?
If we have difficulties quantifying the effects of one agent,
how good are we at detecting the effects of agent
combinations, which appears necessary to detect recessive
mutations?

While it would seem like a good idea in medical therapy to
correct genetic deficiencies in subjects by inserting the correct
gene and deleting the bad one, the cells of the body are not as
easily accessible as the code on a computer hard disk.
Although we have been successful at reading the genome,
effectively fixing it in adults has remained a difficult problem.
1150 human disease genes have been discovered, but only a
few discoveries have led to a cure. Only one, for Chronic
Myeloid Leukemia, has reached the market.
Viral vectors or electroporation techniques for achieving this
delivery have various problems. Until now, very modest
successes have been possible correcting genetic diseases in
tissues of the body that proliferate continuously. French
workers reported curing 9 infants of severe combined immune
deficiency in 2000, but two of them developed leukemia 2
years later9. Unexpected results have been frequent in the few
attempts made at genetic therapy.

13.13. Mutagenicity Testing
In vivo toxicity experiments often pinpoint
the target organ, but not the mechanism by
which the agent produces the effect.

13.12. Risks of Recessive Mutations
Recessive mutations pose the greatest risk and are of the
greatest concern to geneticists.
Redundancy in safety systems poses a problem if there is no
warning of its loss. In genotoxicity, how are recessive
mutations detected? They will only be detected when some
other agent produces a dominant gene function loss or when an
individual becomes homozygous for the recessive trait.
Hemophilia, color-blindness and hereditary baldness are all
caused by recessive alleles on the X chromosome, of which
there are two in women but only one in men. This means that
an agent producing recessive mutations on X in women could
only be uncovered by testing in combination with another
agent capable of disabling the dominant gene or by insuring
that test subjects are homozygous for that gene (the same is

In vitro models that are fast and
inexpensive have become dominant in
mutagenicity testing (T13.26). Even when
animals are used for mutagenicity testing,
the detection procedure is generally
performed in vitro, excluding only the
exposure segment.
Two large classes of models are available:
cells without nuclei and cells who have
them. Cells without nuclei are inherently
more vulnerable to attack because their
13-16

Gonick, 1991

genes are not segregated in a nucleus, and also because they are
not diploid.
Furthermore, the bacteria used in genotoxicity tests carry an rfa
mutation leading to a defective polysaccharide coat, making
the cells more permeable to large molecules. Even further, the
uvrB mutation impairs DNA repair by excision.

hours, by which time any colonies are visible to the eye. The
rapid rate of cell division typical of bacteria is good for the test,
since the DNA is then most vulnerable.
The mutant organism, supported by the inclusion of a complete
nutrient, is mixed with the test agent, incubated, and then
decanted onto an agar plate which contains only a minute
amount of the nutrient (to get growth started). Continued
growth and the development of visible colonies will require
that the test agent be mutagenic, causing some reaction with
the DNA to result in a reversal of the genetic material back to a
"wild-type" organism.

13.13.1. Testing with Prokaryotic Cells
T13.26. In vitro Mutagenicity Testing systems.

Bacteria
Fungi
High life forms

Mammalian cells

Salmonella typhimurium
Escherichia coli
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast)
Neurospora crassa (fungus)
Plants: tradescantia, corn, allium, beans…
Coelenterates - Hydra attenuata
Insects - Drosophila melanogaster
Mouse lymphoma cells
Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO)
Hamster pulmonary cells (V79)
Rodent bone marrow cells
Human lymphocytes

The basis of the bacterial tests involve either:
(1) a reverse-mutation from a nutrient-dependent organism to a
"wild-type" capable of sustaining itself on minimal medium, or
(2) a forward-mutation where additional, chemical-induced
changes in the genetics result in a new, easily identified
phenotype.
Forward mutations present a larger genetic target for the
chemical, with mutations occurring at several loci within one
gene or being spread over several genes. Reverse-mutation
assays, using organisms with mutations at an easily detected
locus, provide small, specific, and selective targets.

It has been know for a long time (the work of Beadle and
Tatum) that mutants of molds, for example, develop nutritional
dependencies after being mutated. Ames developed a bacterial
test systems using mutant organisms with a highly specific
defect in a genetic locus, which cannot grow unless some vital
nutrient (amino acid, sugar) is included in the growth medium.
When the vital nutrient is deliberately withheld from the
medium, the test organism cannot grow. But if the organism
mutates, reverting by chance to the normal "wild-type"
organism, it grows on the medium.
Having spread organisms on nutrient agar, Petri dishes
(F13.27) are incubated at a suitable temperature for 24 to 48

13.13.1.1. Ames Test (prokaryotes in vitro)

The Ames Test was the forerunner in this field, using a number
of mutants of Salmonella typhimurium that were usually
defective for histidine. However, two problems became
obvious with widespread use of this assay system (below).
Genotoxicity tests such as the Ames test measure a compound's
ability to induce DNA damage, a process associated with
13-17

carcinogenesis. Developed in the 1970s, it measures the
reversion of a mutant his gene in Salmonella typhimurium.
Although some substances that cause cancer in laboratory
animals (dioxin, for example) do not give a positive Ames test
(and vice-versa), the ease and low cost of the test make it
invaluable for carcinogenicity screening.

repair gene uvrB and addition of genes that enhance UV and
chemical mutagenesis. The low rate of spontaneous reversion
and the high rate of chemically induced reversion seen with the
test strain make this assay the industry standard for assessing
genotoxicity.

The bacterium used in the test is a strain of Salmonella
typhimurium that caries a defective (mutant) gene making it
unable to synthesize the amino acid histidine (his) from the
ingredients in its culture medium. However, some types of
mutations can be reversed, a back mutation, with the gene
regaining its function. These revertants are able to grow on a
medium lacking histidine.

The problems associated with the Ames test are:

13.13.1.2. Problems of the Ames Test

(1) Not all mutagens cause mutations in the test, since some
require biotransformation into active intermediates. This
difficulty is overcome by the inclusion of rodent liver
homogenate (“S9”) to provide the necessary enzymes during
incubation to activate promutagenic agents to mutagens. The
homogenate is however toxic, so that such tests cannot be done
long-term.

F13.27. Ames Test.

(2) The Ames Test is super-sensitive: increased reversion to
"wild-type" organisms occurs even when a test tube of the
organisms is shaken up. This over-sensitivity is overcome by
using other cell systems (E. coli, yeasts, fungi, etc.) and
developing a test battery rather than relying on a single test.

F13.27 shows a qualitative
version of the Ames test. A
suspension of a histidinerequiring his- strain of
Salmonella typhimurium has
been plated with a mixture of
rat liver enzymes on agar
lacking histidine. The disk of
filter paper has been impregnated with 10 µg of 2aminofluorine, a known carcinogen.

The Ames Test is actually a test of mutagenic action on
bacteria, rather than carcinogenicity. When many chemicals
with a good safety record, synthetic and natural, are tested,
many record positive in the Ames test. This proves that
bacteria are exceptionally sensitive to chemicals. But to assess
carcinogenic risks to humans, it is necessary to introduce a
battery of tests of mutagenicity (see 13.11). Decisions for the
further evaluation of a chemical rest on the outcome of the
results of these numerous tests.
An investigator can use any biological fluid (sputum, urine,
bronchial lavage, etc.) from exposed individuals and
incorporate it into the standard Ames Test 2.

The mutagenic effect of the chemical has caused many bacteria
to regain the ability to grow without histidine, forming the his+
colonies seen around the white disk. The scattered colonies
near the margin of the disk represent spontaneous revertants.
The strain contains a number of other alterations that dispose it
to mutagenesis studies, including a deletion in the excision
13-18

Imprinting present in an animal or human can be erased by
various procedures, leading to changing characteristics or even
abnormalities. But cell culture corrupts imprinting, especially
over time, because cultured cells optimize themselves to
survive under culture conditions, leading to alterations in their
epi-genetic features.

T13.28. Foods found to have Mutagenic
Components in the Ames Assay

Coffee
Tea
Broiled beef and pork
Broiled fish
Pickled vegetables (Japanese)
Flavonoids in many edible plants
Mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus)
Salted fish (Chinese)
Caramelized sugars (glucose / fructose)
Pyrolysates of onion and garlic
Aflatoxin and other mycotoxins
(food contamination)
Safrole

The endpoints measured for mutation vary considerably and
these tests are used extensively: DNA damage/repair assays,
unscheduled DNA synthesis, enzymatic changes,
morphological aberrations (sister chromatid exchanges,
micronucleus formation, chromosomal breaks - clastogenesis).
13.13.3. Sister Chromatid Exchange
(mammalian cells in vitro)
In this test, chromosomes are marked by growing cells in the
presence of a thymidine analog, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU).
As cells continue to grow in the presence of the agent,
breakages in the chromosome may occur and be repaired by
cellular machinery. But because of the marking, the fixes will
be visible as harlequin chromosomes. (F13.29)

13.13.2. Testing with Eukaryotic Cells
Bacterial metabolism and human metabolism are not the same,
so investigators began to use mammalian and human cells for
testing. Some of these cells are capable of biotransformation of
the agent, eliminating the need for agent activation by rodent
liver homogenates.
Although one can usually obtain and grow cells of human
origin in vitro for the purposes of experimentation, the process
of cell culture itself may not allow transmission of essential
characteristics. By DNA methylation or acetylation of histones,
genes can be imprinted for suppression or expression. Erasure
of imprinting is normal in conception (but may not be total),
where the imprints of gametes are lost and then re-established.
This also happens in the adult body, where maternal or paternal
alleles are suppressed, affecting the nature and amount of
protein produced by cells. The number of epigenetic
differences in 50-year old twins is more than triple that in 3year old twins.

F13.29. A: Untreated human lymphocyte.
B: Exposed to ethyl carbamate. Casarett & Doull.

13-19

13.13.4. Micronuclei (eukaryotes in vivo)

“Comet Test”. Study of the length of these tails is indicative of
DNA damage.
The comet assay is exquisitely sensitive to the detection of
DNA damage in individual cells, and it is becoming an
influential tool in the measurement of genotoxicity.
It was used initially to assess sulfuric acid-potassium
permanganate mixtures in coordination with the Ames test.
Applications followed with the insecticide lindane, organic
mercury compounds, l-chloro-methyl-pyrene, as well as
documenting the antigenotoxic activities of lactic acid bacteria.

A "micronucleus" is literally a small nucleus. During cell
division, the genetic material should spread equally between
the two daughter cells. If chromosomes are broken, pieces of
chromosomes or whole chromosomes may fail to be included
in either of the two daughter nuclei because they lack a
centromere and are not pulled to the appropriate pole of the
spindle. The material may form
its own "micronucleus", which is
clearly visible with a microscope.
If a treated group of animals
shows significantly higher
frequencies of micronucleated
cells than do the untreated control
animals, then the chemical is
considered to be capable of
inducing chromosomal damage3.
F13.30. Micronuclei in human lymphocyte. Casarett & Doull.

13.13.5. Comet Test (in vivo)
F13.31. Computerized view of a Comet tail. Lai.

This test, also called the single cell gel assay, is a very
important alternative to the cytogenetic tests. It is less labour
intensive, more rapid and less expensive. There are no
restrictions on the source of the cells, which cells may be
exposed either in vivo or in vitro. After exposure, cells are
obtained as a suspension and laid down on a slide in a thin
agarose gel. Once on the slide, the lysed cells are subjected to
electrophoresis in neutral or basic medium. The pH, which
influences the level of DNA uncoiling, determines in part
whether single strand or double-strand DNA breaks are
detected by the method. The nuclear material can be stained
after electrophoresis, and breaks in DNA appear graphically as
a tail from the round location of the nucleus, thus the name

The test is able to provide information on individual cells and
both on damage to DNA and on alteration of the ability of cells
to repair DNA.
13.13.6. Genetic MicroArray Testing
Genetic MicroArrays can be used to
assess cellular responses to ionizing
radiation, for example, and may be
used to determine individual genetic
sensitivity to radiation in the future. It
is known from micronuclei formation
in T lymphocytes that individuals vary
13-20

in their responses, probably because of variations in DNA
repair mechanisms. Specific genetic responses are triggered in
cultured primary keratinocytes from adult skin at high (2 Gy)
or low (10 mGy) doses of gamma rays. Experiments with DNA
microarrays (10,500 gene probes) show that among 853
modulated probes, the expression of 214 are specifically
modulated by low-dose (10 mGy) and 370 genes by high-dose
(2Gy) exposure. Low-dose-specific genes (140 known genes)
include mostly genes of homeostasis, cell communication,
signaling, membrane, cytoskeleton, RNA and protein synthesis,
chromatin, energy metabolism, stress, cell death and transport
but rarely DNA repair genes18. The conclusion is that radiation
response at low doses is quite specific and different from that
obtained at high doses.

To improve on the accuracy of a single test, standard three-test
batteries for genotoxicicy are used. A common triad is:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

13.15. Cancer and Mutation
It is generally assumed that genotoxicity underlies
carcinogenicity, and this is mostly true. However, because
organisms have DNA repair mechanisms as well as cell
population management mechanisms, actual causes of
carcinogenicity can be quite complex.
It is conceptually possible for a single molecular hit to create a
cancer, but a more likely cause is a mutation which disables a
physiological system. Down the road, this impairment leads to
cancer. This is why tumors often take some time to appear,
together with the fact that they need some time to grow.

Compound

Established
Human
Carcinogen

Bacteria

Yeast

Drosophila

Mammalian
Cells

Human Cells

T13.32. Comparative Mutagenicity of Various Compounds.
N = no; Y = yes; 0 = not tested. Williams and Burson.

Epichlorohydrin
Ethyleneimine
Trimethyl phosphate
Tris
Ethylene dibromide
Vinyl chloride
Chloroprene
Urethane

N
N
0
N
N
Y
Y
N

N
0
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

0
Y
0
0
Y
Y
0
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
0

an in vitro test in bacteria;
an in vitro test in mammalian cells with cytogenetic
evaluation of chromosomal damage and/or a test that
detects gene mutations;
an in vivo test for chromosomal damage using rodent
hematopoietic cells.

13.16. Genotoxicity to Carcinogenicity
Somatic cells can mutate directly to forms expressing rapid
division and de-differentiation, resulting in cancerous tissue
(F13.15). An example illustrating the link between cancer and
DNA damage comes from lung cancer. It was found that lung
cancer patients are more likely (41%) than the general
population (4%) to be low in the DNA repair enzyme 8oxoguanine DNA N-glycosylase (OGG). This enzyme repairs
DNA damaged by oxidation7. Smoking boosts lung cancer risk
by 10 to 20-fold. If further you have low OGG, the boost is
100-fold.

13.14. Test Batteries in Mutagenic Testing
With many genotoxicity methods available in many models,
the results do not always corroborate one another (T13.32).
13-21

When somatic cells mutate directly to forms expressing rapid
division and de-differentiation, we usually obtain cancerous
tissue (F13.15).
There are specific mechanisms known to lead to cancer. One of
the best known is damage to the p53 gene and consequently to
the supply of p53 protein. The p53 gene is normally silent, but
is turned on by DNA damage. When triggered, it halts cell
division, making time for repairs. If the repairs are not
successful, it can also induce apoptosis.

13.17. Apoptosis
F13.34 Processes of Cell Death
Necrosis: the process of elimination of dead material.
Apoptosis: programmed cell death in which caspases are activated and
apoptosomes are formed.
Paraptosis: cell swells but also forms vacuoles. Can be triggered by
withholding an hormone or protein on which the cell has become dependant.
Autoschizis: the nucleus departs the cytoplasm. Can be triggered by oxidative
attack.
Oncosis: cell swells to death from oxygen starvation, ATP depletion, excess
sodium and water, protein denaturation and intracellular calcium excess.

However, the path to cancer can be more complex than a
specific mutation, and can involve more indirect mechanisms
(such as promotion) based on normal physiological
maintenance. Because of this, the connection between
mutagenicity and carcinogenicity is not simple (F13.33).
F13.33. All carcinogens are not mutagens. Richards, 2008.
Known Human
Carcinogens
Aflatoxins
Arsenic and ar.compounds
Asbestos
Azathioprine
Benzene
Benzidine
Beryllium
Cadmium compounds
Chromium [VI] compounds
Cyclophosphamide
Diethylstilbestrol
Ethylene oxide
Formaldehyde
Gallium arsenide
Vinvl chloride

Mutagen
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Suspected Human
Carcinogens
Acrylamide
Benz[a]anthracene
Benzidine-based dyes
Benzo[a]pyrene
Carbazole
Chlordane
Ethylene dibromide
Glycidol
Lead
Styrene-7,S-oxide
Tetrachloroethylene
Benzofuran
Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl)
phosphate
Vinyl bromide
Vinvl fluoride

Mutagen
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

Short-term death in cells (F13.34) can result from necrosis or
apoptosis, an endogenous death mechanism. Whether cells die
by one mechanism or the other often depends on how quick
and severe the damage is. High intensity stresses, for example,
large concentrations of a toxicant, kill by necrosis, while
milder stresses may induce apoptosis.
Apoptosis (F13.35) destroys cells without inflammation after
some dangerous damage has been inflicted on them. Apoptosis
is predictive of epigenetic carcinogenicity.
There are at least two pathways leading to apoptosis, an
"Extrinsic" and an "Intrinsic" Pathway. Both activate a family
of Cys (Cysteine) Proteases, named Caspases that act in a
proteolytic cascade to dismantle and remove the dying cell.

Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes

13-22

One of the extrinsic pathways is the the stimulation of tumor
necrosis factor receptors such as CD95 (or Fas). This leads to
activation of the p53 gene, which triggers decay of the
mitochondria. The mitochondria in turn release cytochrome C
(an energy enzyme) into the cytoplasm of the cell, resulting in
full-fledged apoptosis.
Any damage to p53 will inhibit this self-destruction
mechanism, which rids the body of defective cells. Many
human cancers have been found to have alterations to p53. p53

knockout mice are used as an animal model to assess recessive
mutations.

REFERENCES
1. Mutagenesis-Carcinogenesis. In The Basis of Toxicity Testing. Ecobichon, D.J. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. Ch. 6, pp.
113-127, 1992.
2. Mutagens in urine samples repetitively from municipal refuse incinerator workers and water treatment workers. Ma,
X.F. et al. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 37, 483-494, 1992.
3. Cytogenetic analysis of a human population occupationally exposed to pesticides. Bolognesi, C. et al. Mutation Res.
285, 239-249, 1993.
4. Sister chromatid exchanges in lymphocytes of petroleum retailers. Edwards, J.W. and Priestly, B.G. Br. J. Indust. Med.
50, 149-154, 1993.
5. Genetic instability of cancer cells is proportional to their degree of aneuploidy. Duesberg, P. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, Vol. 95, pp. 13692–13697, November 1998.
6. Imaging genome abnormalities in cancer research. Heng HHQ et al. Cell & Chromosome 2004, 3:1
7. DNA repair activity for oxidative damage and risk of lung cancer. Paz-Elizur, T. . . . and Z. Livneh. 2003. Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 95:1312-1319, Sept. 2003.
8. Retrotransposons regulate host genes in mouse oocytes and preimplantation embryos. Peaston, A.E. . . . and B.B.
Knowles. Developmental Cell 7(October):597-606, 2004
9. Gene Therapy of Human Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID)-X1 Disease. Cavazzana-Calvo, M. et al. Science,
Vol 288, Issue 5466, 669-672 , 28 April 2000.
10. . Topical DNA oligonucleotide therapy reduces UV-induced mutations and photocarcinogenesis in hairless
mice.Goukassian, D.A. . . . and B.A. Gilchrest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101(March 16):3933-3938.
2004
11. The genetic code is one in a million. Freeland SJ and Hurst LD. Journal of Molecular Evolution 47:238-248, 1998.
12. Hsp90 as a capacitor of phenotypic variation. Queitsch, C., T.A. Sangster, and S. Lindquist. Nature 417(June 6):618624. 2002.
13. A distal enhancer and an ultraconserved exon are derived from a novel retroposon. Gill Bejerano et al. Nature,
Volume 441, Number 7089, p 87-90, 2006.
14. A "Silent" Polymorphism in the MDR1 Gene Changes Substrate Specificity. Kimchi-Sarfaty C et al. Science Vol. 315,
no. 5811, pp. 525–528, 26 January 2007.
15. The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. A map of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing.
Nature Vol. 467, October 28, 2010, p. 1061. doi:10.1038/nature09534
16. An Atlas of Combinatorial Transcriptional Regulation in Mouse and Man. Ravasi, T., H. Suzuki, et al. (2010). Cell
140(5): 744-752. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.01.044
17. Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. A John Iafrate et al. Nature Genetics 36, 949 - 951 (2004),
doi:10.1038/ng1416
18. Low-Dose Exposure to X-Rays Induces Specific Gene Regulations in Normal Human Keratinocytes. Noreli Francoa
et al. Radiation Research, June 2005, pp. 623-635.

Apoptosis is important in many cases of chronic toxicity if the
dissolved cells are not completely replaced. On the other hand,
caloric deprivation slows aging by activating sirtuins, a family
of deacetylase enzymes that reduce apoptosis by protecting
cells against reactive oxygen species and DNA damage.
Another self-regeneration mechanism is autophagy, by which
whole organelles, particularly mitochondria, are catabolized.
Mitochondria in non-proliferating tissues like brain, heart and
liver are replaced every 10-25 days. The rate of replacement is
enhanced by nutrient deprivation and glucagon.

F13.35. Mechanisms of Apoptosis.

13-23

14.1. Causes of Cancer .2
14.1.1. Molecular Basis .2
14.1.2. Environmental Cause of Cancer . 3
14.1.3. Occupational Causes of Cancer . 4
14.2. History .4
14.3. Operational Definition of a Carcinogen.5
14.4. Tumor Types . 8
14.4.1. Carcinoma . 8
14.4.2. Sarcoma . 8
14.5. Carcinogens . 8
14.5.1. List of Carcinogens .8
14.5.2. Carcinogen Types .8
14.5.2.1. Genotoxic, Initiator or Ultimate .9
14.5.2.1.1. Direct Carcinogens . 9
14.5.2.1.2. Procarcinogens .9
14.5.2.1. Epigenetic or Promoter. 10
14.6. Classical Mechanism of Tumor Formation . 14
14.6.1. Metastasis . 14
14.6.2. Initiation . 15
14.6.3. Promotion . 15
14.6.4. Progression . 15
14.6.5. Initiation-Promotion-Progression . 17
14.6.6. Genetic View of Cancer . 17
14.6.6.1. Oncogenes . 17
14.6.6.2. Tumor Suppressors . 18
14.6.6.3. Telomeres . 19
14.6.7. Cell Proliferation . 19
14.7. Testing for Cancer . 21
14.8. Toxicity of Cancer Treatments . 21
14.8.1. NIH List of Carcinogens . 23
14.8.2. NIH List of Probable Carcinogens . 23

14.9. Case Study: Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin Contamination
…………………………………………………….25
14.10. Case Study: Industrial Exposure to Chlordimeform 27

14-1

14.1. Causes of Cancer

14.

A brief view of cancer causes (F14.1) is that one-third is from
smoking, one-third from diet and one-third from environmental
and occupational causes. Obesity contributes 10% of all cancer
cases10.
In 1914 Theodor Boveri wrote that cancer cells could
be distinguished from normal ones in that they had
abnormal numbers of chromosomes (see inset at left).
Cells can actually sometimes be cancerous without
being aneuploid. The leading hypothesis on the
nature of cancer suggests that a variety of gene
changes can induce genetic instability, and that
subsequent changes result in cancer, that frequently
show aneuploidy. The conventional view is therefore
that cancer cells are genetically “abnormal”.
Given a system as complex as the genome, the
“normal” cells of the body may be more remarkable
than the cancer cells. To a point, stable genomes
sacrifice adaptability and variability, a hallmark of
bacteria, for the benefit of building coherent multicellular organisms, presumably an advantage to
establish immunity.
Cancer itself is enormously complex, even if all
tumors share some characteristics in common:
runaway cell division and hypoxia.
It would be expected that different cancer types show
different genetic changes, but it is more surprising
that even among people diagnosed with the same
type of cancer, there are individual patterns of genetic
changes.
Therapies for cancer would gain from being highly
individualized.

14.1.1. Molecular Basis
Although the environment can be controlled to reduce cancer
rates, there will probably always be a basal cancer rate
resulting from genetic structure. This basal cancer rate can only
be changed by altering the genome itself towards increased
stability. Therefore, cancer is a disease that needs to be fought
ongoingly in species that show genomic adaptability.
Cancer can happen in a wide variety of ways, some almost
trivial. Ames has shown the deficiencies in vitamins B12, B6 or

folic acid (shown in sequence) cause replicating DNA to
incorporate uracil instead of thymine. When two such events
occur closely on opposite strands, repair can yield doublestranded nicks which break chromosomes, causing cancer 5.
The myc protein (shown), when enhanced,
spurs liver tumor growth from apparently
normal tissue. Stopping myc manufacture
causes the cancer cells to differentiate back
into apparently normal liver cells. However,
their cancerous character can be reawakened by the return of
myc synthesis7.
14-2

The cancer pathways are extremely numerous. The
retinoblastoma protein, for example, is central to the process
of cell proliferation, activating the genes for cell division. An
interesting property of this protein is that it
is active in a wide variety of cellular
processes, and interacts with more than 100
other proteins.
Several viruses have been linked to cancer.
Epstein-Barr virus (shown) to Burkitt’s
lymphoma, Hepatitis B/C viruses to liver
cancer, HTLV-I to T-cell leukemia and
Papilloma viruses (shown) to cervical
cancer. In rare cases in animals (canine
transmissible venereal sarcoma), it can even
be transmitted through cell exchange.

Avoidable Cancer Risk Factors
causing more than 30% of cancers

14.1.2. Environmental Cause of Cancer
Cancer is feared. Information that a chemical causes cancer
sets the media into a frenzy of reporting to avid readers or
listeners, and governments into regulatory responses.
For example, a statement many years ago by John Higginson
that 80% of all cancers could be attributed to the
"environment" was interpreted by the press and the reading
public to mean that things outside their control were the root
causes of cancer. Higginson meant "environment" to include
lifestyles, diet, drugs and workplace exposures in addition to
contaminants in the air, soil, and water (F14.1). This statement
is supported by international observations on cancer incidence
in migrants. National differences in the incidence of cancer are
obvious from F14.7, but for virtually all cancers, with the


1. Overweight
Low fruit and vegetable intake
3. Physical inactivity
4. Smoking
5. Alcohol consumption
6. Unsafe sex
7. Urban air pollution
8. Indoor smoke from coal
Contaminated injections from health care
2.

9.

passage of time, or in succeeding generations, rates tend to
approach those of the native-born in the country of adoption,
pointing to the importance of environmentally determined
hormonal or dietary causes.
Some controllable causes of cancer are smoking and drinking
alcohol. In the case of alcohol, it is known that alcohol
consumption induces cytochrome P450 2El enzymes. The
enzyme also activates procarcinogens such as nitrosamines.
Genetic variants of the CYP 2E1 gene were previously
reported to be risk factors for various cancers. It is estimated
that 30% of cancers could be eliminated through dietary
intervention.

childhood eye cancer arising from immature cells in the retina.

14-3

14.1.3. Occupational Causes of Cancer

Despite efforts at controlling exposure to carcinogens,
occupational cancer is still prevalent among the workforce,
particularly in the older individuals whose exposure predated
many regulations lowering the toxicant levels.
The first association between cancer and an industrial chemical
was found by Percival Potts, a surgeon, in 1775 (T14.3).
Subjects were usually in their early 20s and had been employed
as young boys to climb up into large chimneys and scrape
down the accumulated hydrocarbons (polycyclic aromatics,
PAHs), metals (lead, arsenic), and carbon. Potts was busily
removing diseased testicles from these people. Their scrotal
cancer related to soot from the soft coal burned in the
fireplaces. The scrotum is an area where chemicals can be
efficiently absorbed. Not surprisingly, PAHs and arsenic
caused a local irritation, changes in DNA and, eventually,
cancer.

T14.2. Cancers and Metals.
A. Metals Causing Human Cancer
Arsenic
Cu refinery
Pulmonary carcinoma
As pesticides
Lymphoma, leukemia
Chemical plants
Dermal carcinoma
Drinking water (oral)
Hepatic angiosarcoma
Cigarette smoke
Cadmium
Cd refinery
Pulmonary carcinoma, Prostatic carcinoma
Chromium
Cr refinery
Pulmonary carcinoma
Chrome plating, Chromate pigments
Gastrointestinal carcinoma
Nickel
Pulmonary carcinoma, Nasolaryngeal carcinoma,
Ni refinery
Gastric and renal carcinoma, Sarcoma (?)
B. Metals causing Animal Cancers
METALS
ANIMALS
TUMOR
SITE
ROUTE
Mice, rats,
Osteosarcoma Bone
Beryllium
IV, INH
monkeys
Carcinoma
Lung
Mice, rats,
Sarcoma
Injection site
Cadmium
IM, SC, ITS
chickens
Teratoma
Testes
Cobalt
Rats, rabbits
Sarcoma
Injection site
IM, SC
Mice, rats,
Sarcoma
Injection site
IM, SC, IP,
Chromium
rabbits
Carcinoma
Lung
INH
Hamsters, mice,
Iron
Sarcoma
Injection site
IM, IP, SC
rats, rabbits
Mice, rats, cats,
Sarcoma
Injection site
hamsters,
IM, ITS, SC
Nickel
Carcinoma
Lung
rabbits Guinea
INH, IP, IR
Carcinoma
Kidney
pigs, rats
Lead
Mice, rats
Carcinoma
Kidney
IP, PO, SC
Titanium
Rats
Sarcoma
Injection site
IM
Chickens, rats,
Carcinoma
Testes
Zinc
ITS
hamsters
Teratoma
Testes

14.2. History
T14.3. Historical Development of Cancer Science.
1761
1775
1843
1881
1893
1901
1914
1918
1930s
1934

IV = intravenous; INH = inhalation; IM = intramuscular; SC = subcutaneous; ITS =
intratesticular; IP = intraperitoneal; IR = intrarenal; PO = per os. SOURCE: Sky-Peck (1986).

1940
1951

14-4

Increased incidence of nasal cancer among snuff users.
Increased incidence of scrotal cancer among chimney sweeps.
Scrotal cancer in smelters due to arsenic.
Lung malignancy in uranium miners.
Bladder cancer due to aromatic amines.
Lung fibrosis.
Mutagenesis and Somatic Mutation Theory suggests that cancer is related to
chromosome abnormalities and alteration in genetic material.
First Animal Data: multiple applications of coal tar to rabbit ears produces skin
carcinomas.
Isolation of a single active carcinogenic chemical from coal tar (Benzo-a-Pyrene).
Isolation of single cell clones from a tumor and finding that injection of these cells
into a healthy host reproduces the disease, demonstrating that cancer is a stable,
heritable cellular alteration.
Radium brushes and lip cancer in dial painters.
Cancer related to asbestos exposure.

Animal experiments and occupational workers exposed to
benzene, chromates, tars, coal-tar dye intermediates, radiation
and asbestos were the first to associate substance use with
cancer.

T14.4. Regulatory Classification of Carcinogens.

Organization

Rating
A

14.3. Operational Definition of a
Carcinogen

B1
(probable)

A carcinogen is an agent having the ability to change the tumor
incidence normally observed in control subjects by:

Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA)

B2
(probable)
C
(possible)

1. decreasing the delay in the appearance of the naturally
observed tumors,
2. increasing the frequency of the normally observed tumors
in a population,
3. increasing the number of tumors per individual,
4. producing new tumor types,
5. increasing the growth rate of tumors.

D
E

1

Carcinogens are recognized by their ability to create tumors
because diagnosing cancer from blood tests is unreliable,
largely due to the fact that the malignant phenotype is derived
from normal cellular functions. Of course, by the time a cancer
produces clinical symptoms, the window of curative
possibilities has largely passed.
The operational definition of a carcinogen refers to changing
“the tumor incidence normally observed” because the
incidence of tumors in humans and in animal models is not
zero, even under the best conditions (T14.5). To adequately
detect changes in tumor incidence, the species should not have
a natural rate that is too low or too high, to insure sensitivity
and specificity. For more details on cancer rates for mice and
rats, see the files “Cancer Rate Mouse Data.pdf” and
“Cancer Rate Rat Data.pdf”.

2A
International Agency for
Research on Cancer
(IARC)
2B
3
4

Description
Sufficient evidence from
epidemiologic studies to support
a causal association
Limited evidence in humans
from epidemiologic studies
Sufficient evidence from animal
studies but limited evidence in
humans
Limited or equivocal evidence
from animal studies and
inadequate or no data in humans
Inadequate evidence in animals
No evidence of carcinogenicity
in at least two adequate animal
tests in different species
Sufficient epidemiological
evidence for carcinogenicity in
humans
Probably carcinogenic in humans
based on limited evidence in
humans and sufficient evidence
in animals
Possibly carcinogenic in humans
based on sufficient evidence in
animals but inadequate evidence
in humans or limited evidence in
humans with insufficient
evidence in animals
Not classifiable
Not carcinogenic

For evidence of carcinogenicity, production of benign
neoplasms is accepted, as no chemical has been found that
produces them exclusively. Regulatory agencies (IARC) accept
that benign neoplasms represent the first stage of the cancer
process. The conventional classification of carcinogens based

14-5

on the “weight of evidence” approach is presented in T14.4.
These ratings are mentioned in the MSDS sheets.
Carcinogens are often potent toxicants. If cancer is avoided, it
is rather unlikely that other toxicities will occur.
T14.5. Spontaneous Tumor Incidence (%, benign and malignant) by
Site and Sex in B6C3Fl Mice and F344 Rats.
B6C3F1 MICE
F344 RATS
Site
Male
Female
Male
Female
Liver Adenoma
10.3
4.0
3.4
3.0
Liver Carcinoma
21.3
4.1
0.8
0.2
Pituitary
0.7
8.3
24.7
47.5
Adrenal
3.8
1.0
19.4
8.0
Thyroid
1.3
2.1
10.7
9.3
Hematopoietic
12.7
27.2
30.1
18.9
Mammary gland
0
1.9
2.5
26.1
Lung
17.1
7.5
2.4
1.2
From Goodman et al. (1979) and Chandra and Frith (1992).

F14.6. Cumulative Risk of Death from Cancer for Rat and Human.

14-6

F14.7. Cancer frequency around the world.

14-7

weak. Reliance must then be placed on the weight and strength
of animal studies.
The courts are not terribly sophisticated in their approach to
science, so they tend to bias strongly the acceptable evidence
for causation of cancer on epidemiology. Researchers and
regulators, by contrast, frequently make judgments from
animal or in vitro experiments. Nearly 50% of probable human
carcinogens and a few know human carcinogens are
considered such by IARC without epidemiological evidence
(based on animal and in vitro studies).
Agencies such as the U.S. EPA or the International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC) in Lyon, France, have developed
lists of carcinogens, but not all agencies list the same
chemicals.
Generally, about 45 to 190 chemicals, of which only half are
industrial chemicals (the others being drugs), are recognized.
See the lists of recognized and suspected carcinogens at the end
of this chapter.
Lists of recognized and suspected carcinogens found in the
workplace are given in T14.8-9.

14.4. Tumor Types
14.4.1. Carcinoma
A malignant new growth of epithelial cells that gives rise to
metastases. A carcinoma is a malignant growth that arises from
the epithelium. Carcinomas tend to spread (metastasis)
through the blood vessels, lymph channels or spinal fluid to
other organs such as the bone, liver, lung or the brain. At least
80% of all cancers are carcinomas.
14.4.2. Sarcoma
An often highly malignant tumor made of tissue similar to
normal "connective tissues". It is derived from the mesoderm:
fat, muscle, blood vessels, deep skin tissues, nerves, bones, and
cartilage.
In spite of these broad classifications, it is probable that each
patient’s cancer has a unique profile of genetic alterations.

14.5. Carcinogens
14.5.1. List of Carcinogens

14.5.2. Carcinogen Types

Although many chemicals have shown to induce tumors in
animals, remarkably few have been proven to cause cancer in
humans. Carcinogenicity is easy to prove if, as in the case of
vinyl chloride, there is strong evidence from epidemiological
studies of an association or causal relationship with an
exceedingly rare carcinoma, angiosarcoma1. However, one
generally encounters the situation where the human data is

In the early days, a number of compounds were isolated from
coal tar that could induce cancer at the point of application
(F14.11). They were polycyclic hydrocarbons, containing
virtually nothing but carbon and hydrogen. Some years later,
chemicals (F14.12) applied to animals were found to induce
cancers at remote sites (liver, kidneys, etc).
As knowledge improved, it was determined that some
carcinogens needed biological activation from procarcinogen
to proximate carcinogen to ultimate carcinogen (F14.13) by
Phase I enzymes or by conjugation (F14.14) with Phase II
enzymes.



The epithelium is the covering of internal and external surfaces of the
body, including the lining of vessels and other small cavities. The
epithelium also includes the skin and lining of the organs such as breast,
prostate, lung, stomach or bowel.

14-8

through alkylation or oxidation. For example, radiation can
ionize DNA, as well as ionize water to produce reactive
oxygen species that can alter DNA. Inorganic Agents can
generate free radicals or interfere with enzymes associated with
replication of DNA, altering fidelity of replication.

T14.8. Industries-Trades with Proven Excess Cancers
INDUSTRIES AND
PRIMARY
AGENT
TRADES
AFFECTED SITE
Para-aminodiphenyl
Chemical manufacturing
Urinary bladder
Construction, asbestos
mining and milling,
production of friction
products and cement

Pleura, peritoneum,
bronchus

Arsenic

Copper mining and
smelting

Skin, bronchus, liver

Alkylating agents
(mechloro ethamine
hydrochloride and
bis[chloromethyl]ether)

Chemical manufacturing

Bronchus

Benzene

Chemical and rubber
manufacturing, petroleum
refining

Bone marrow

Dye and textile production

Urinary bladder

Ethylene oxide

Tanning, pigment making

Nasal sinus, bronchus
Cancer of paranasal
sinuses
Nasal sinus, bronchus

Formaldehyde

Asbestos

Benzidine, betanaphthylamine,
and derived dyes
Chromium and chromates
Isopropyl alcohol
manufacture
Nickel
Polynuclear aromatic
hydro-carbons from coke,
coal tar, shale, mineral
oils, and creosote
Vinyl chloride monomer
Wood dust

T14.9. Industries and Trades with Suspected Excess Cancers
Casarett and Doull.

AGENT
Acrylonitrile
Beryllium

Chemical manufacturing
Nickel refining
Steel making, roofing,
chimney cleaning

Skin, scrotum, bronchus

Chemical manufacturing
Cabinetmaking, carpentry

Liver
Nasal sinus

Cadmium

Synthetic mineral fibers
(e.g., fibrous glass)
Phenoxyacetic acid
Polychlorinated
biphenyls
Organochlorine
pesticides
(e.g., chlordane, dieldrin)
Silica

14.5.2.1. Genotoxic, Initiator or Ultimate

These carcinogens act directly on DNA to form strong covalent
bonds.

INDUSTRIES AND
TRADES
Chemical and plastics
Beryllium processing,
aircraft manufacturing,
electronics, secondary
smelting
Smelting, battery making
Welding
Hospitals, production of
hospital supplies
Plastic, textile, and
chemical production; health
care

SUSPECTED HUMAN
SITES
Lung, colon, prostate

Manufacturing, insulation

Bronchus

Farming, herbicide
application
Electrical equipment
production and maintenance

Bronchus
Bronchus
Bone marrow
Nasal sinus, bronchus

Soft tissue sarcoma
Liver

Pesticide manufacture and
application, agriculture

Bone marrow

Casting, mining refracting

Bronchus

14.5.2.1.2. Procarcinogens

Procarcinogens require biotransformation to reactive
intermediates, or to proximate carcinogens capable of reacting
with DNA. Most chemical carcinogens belong to this second
group.

14.5.2.1.1. Direct Carcinogens

Direct Carcinogens are intrinsically reactive compounds that
do not require metabolic activation by cellular enzymes to
interact with DNA. Irreversible DNA damage can occur
14-9

14.5.2.1. Epigenetic or Promoter

Epigenetic or Promoter carcinogens are agents that do not alter
the base sequences of DNA, but modify cell behavior by the
way of non-heritable molecular modifications.
These molecular changes may enhance absorption, reduce
elimination or increase-decrease biotransformation.

So, there are different epigenetic modifications in every
tissue, and even in every person.
However, identical twins who start out with nearly identical
methylation patterns grow apart epigenetically as they age.
In cancer, it is often found that protective protein have
been turned off by epigenetic modifications. Therefore,
drugs such as decitabine which demythylate DNA may
have a role in cancer therapy.

DNA methylation results in “epi-genetic”
inactivation of genes.
Newly synthesized strands of DNA are not methylated, but
over time, 3-5% of cytosine-guanine pairs become methylated,
silencing transcription of the methylated segments. These
components often cluster near the beginning of a gene, where
protein attach to turn genes on. So, the presence of methyl
groups turns genes off.

Histone modifications: the protein that act as support to
DNA can bear a “histone code”, sometimes referred to
as “peri-genetic” changes,
or RNA interference (RNAi): alteration of translation,
sometimes referred to as “extra-genetic” changes.
Other mechanisms are:

T14.10. Types of Carcinogens with examples.
Genotoxic
("Initiators")

Direct

Procarcinogens
Epigenetic
("Promoters")

Alter expression of
genes, proliferation
and differentiation.

Nitrosomethylurea (NMU),
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-Nitrosoguanidine,
Nuclear radiation,
Electromagnetic radiation, Arsenic,
Chromium, Nickel.
Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP),
BP-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide.
12-0-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate
(TPA).

Stimulation of proliferation
Inhibition of apoptosis
Cytotoxicity followed by compensatory regeneration
Modification of endocrine function
Immunosuppression
Activation of specific receptors (ex., PPAR)
There are no pure promoters. If you give enough of a promoter,
even without an initiator, cancer will occur. Probably, resident
initiators are always present at a low level.
A chemical able to induce cancer by itself is called a complete
carcinogen.

Epigenetic marker patterns are programmed long before an
animal’s birth. All cells types have a distinct pattern of
methylation and histone modification that prepare a cell to
do its specific job in the body. As a consequence of enzyme
activity, epigenetic modifications are passed down as cells
divide.

14-10

F14.11 Topical Carcinogens.

F14.12 Remote Carcinogens.

14-11

F14.13. Metabolic activation of carcinogenicity by Phase I enzymes.

14.14. Metabolic activation of carcinogenicity by Phase II enzymes.

Casarett & Doull.

Casarett & Doull.

14-12

F14.16. Structural alerts (identified by letters) for mutagenicity.
Casarett & Doull.

Promoters can be very variable in structure (F14.15), probably
as a reflection of the wide variety of physiological effects they
can address.
Co-carcinogens involve hormonal action on cell proliferation,
inhibition of intercellular communication and
immunosuppression. These substances favor the proliferation
of cells with an altered genotype (cells containing a mutation)
as well as proliferative and differentiated phenotypes, thereby
enhancing tumor growth.
Finally, there is some predictability in carcinogenic potential of
molecules which can be summarized in the ultimate
carcinogenic molecule (F14.16), compacting all alterations
known to favor the expression of mutagenicity.
F14.15. Representative Promoters.

14-13

14.6. Classical Mechanism of Tumor
Formation
Cancer is uncontrolled cell growth, differentiation, and
development. A phenomenological description of cancer
development in epithelial tissue is shown in F14.17.
14.6.1. Metastasis
Metastasis is the spread of a disease (usually cancer) from an
original site to other parts of the body. This usually happens
when cancer cells break off from the original tumor and travel
through the blood vessels to a new site. This kind of cancer is
called malignant, meaning that it is life-threatening and usually
fatal.
A Primitive Tumor is determined to have originated in the
tissue itself (not a metastasis). When metastasis occurs, it
localizes as a result of circulation patterns (F14.18) or of
cellular affinity to specific tissues. If cells from human breast
tumors that have metastasized to the lungs are injected
intravenously into mice, we observe implantation of the cells
into the lungs of the animals8.
Most neoplasms show chromosomal aberrations, as the cause
or result of the cancerous activity. This suggests that
carcinogenic agents interact with DNA before the carcinogenic
process begins.
Because many cancers take decades to develop, it is probable
that the process typically occurs in steps (F14.19).
There is a practical distinction between initiation (involving a
genetic damage) and promotion-progression, which may act by
non-genetic means:

F14.17. Phenomenological Development of Cancer.
Scientific American.

14-14

1. action of non-mutagens should be required for a longer
period of time than initiators, and
2. action of non-mutagens should be reversible at some point.

Promotion is probably intimately related to apoptosis, and
many suppressors of apoptosis are cancer promoters.

A normal cell is "converted" into a preneoplastic cell, this
altered cell eventually becoming a neoplastic cell. The multistep hypothesis finds support in the existence in vitro of
transformed cells. These cells have a different appearance,
survive without growth factors and do not need to be anchored
to a solid support (can grow in soft agar). A test called “soft
agar cloning”, the ability of cells to invade gels, is a major test
for carcinogenicity at the cellular level.
Most human trials monitoring cancer follow the relatively rapid
development of precancerous biomarkers such as elevated
concentrations of enzymes, cell changes or activation of certain
genes.
In experimental animal models, carcinogenesis is divided into
at least three stages:

Irreversible conversion of a benign tumor to a malignant tumor.
Involve further genetic changes (karyotype instability), it is
characterized by changes in the phenotypic appearance of the
cells (size, shape), in growth rates. Progression is brought
about either by the activation of proto-oncogenes or by the
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes.

14.6.4. Progression

F14.18. Circulatory
Patterns of
Metastasis.
Scientific American.

14.6.2. Initiation
An irreversible genotoxic event resulting in alteration of the
primary sequence of DNA, rather than cell morphology.
Permanent, heritable change (Somatic Mutation Theory),
possibly resulting from a single bolus.
14.6.3. Promotion
A reversible epigenetic event affecting an initiated cell.
Promoters must be administered in a sustained way to be
effective. The initiated (mutant) cell may remain dormant until
exposed to a tumor promoter, which allows the initiated cell to
expand clonally and eventually produces a tumor. Promoters
influence growth hormone production, regulate gene
expression (stimulation or suppression) and interfere with cell
differentiation (proliferation of colonies of immature cells).

14-15

MINIMUM CONDITIONS FOR CANCER
A long-standing question has been whether it is possible to
generate a cancer from a single event (single hit) or whether
multiple events are necessary (multi-hit). These two alternatives
model to a different dose-response.
If a single initiating event triggered cancer, the risk would be
expected to rise continuously as the radiation, for example,
increased. Any type of more intricate physiology in
carcinogenesis could produce more complex curves, perhaps with
breaks in the slope as one increases dose. Dose-responses should
also ideally include background cancer rates that happen
spontaneously as a result of the presence of proto-oncogenes, for
example.
Until recently, it was thought that in humans, four to six
independent events were necessary for tumorigenesis.
It is possible to trigger cancer in the mouse with just 2 genetic
changes, the addition of 2 oncogenes.
It has been possible recently to create a human cancer cell purely
from genetic manipulations. In humans it is necessary to have 2
oncogenes (ras, SV40 large T antigen which inhibits p53 and
retinoblastoma protein) plus telomerase (hTERT).
Inhibitors of telomerase can remortalize human cancer cells,
ultimately leading to death of transformed human breast
epithelial cells and human prostate cancer cells in culture
(Geron). Telomerase activity is detectable in over 30 different
human cancer types and is the primary mechanism for
maintaining telomere length in human cancers.
F14.19. Steps in Cancer Development. Williams and Burson.

14-16

The Classical Initiation-Promotion model is DMBA-TPA
(shown).

14.6.5. Initiation-Promotion-Progression

Initiator: DMBA = 7, 12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene,
Promoter: TPA = 12-0-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate.
A short course of an initiator is followed by sustained
administration of a promoter (F14.20). For example, DMBA
for 2 weeks, TPA 2 times per week for 6-30 weeks.
If repeated exposures are required to manifest the carcinogenic
potential of a substance, the distinction between initiator and
promoter can become problematic.
14.6.6. Genetic View of Cancer
When studied at the level of genes, one obvious characteristic
is that tumors have altered numbers of chromosomes (sidebar
on page 14-2). Genetic alterations that are lethal at the level of
the whole organism are acceptable if the only function of the
cell is to proliferate. Those alterations may be effects rather
than causes.
14.6.6.1. Oncogenes

On the other hand, certain genes are known, oncogenes, that
can cause cancer when mutated or inappropriately expressed.
These genes are normal components of cellular machinery
which are over- or under-expressed.

F14.20. Interaction of Initiators,
Promoters and Progressors.

14-17

Typically, the gene encodes a protein that promotes growth
(cell division): if normal control of growth is lost, a normal cell
transforms into a malignant (tumor) cell.
Whether or not an oncogene causes cancer depends on: genetic
makeup and environmental variables (vitamin deficiency or
smoking habits).
If the oncogene is introduced in a mouse model by genetic
engineering, it typically causes cancer in only a few tissues,
even if the gene is expressed in all.
A protein expressed in a variety of cells may only induce
cancer in some tissues, and then only at a specific times in
development. Highly specific conditions allow the cancer to
develop under the influence of the protein product.
Oncogenes explain why certain strains of animals appear to
have a higher than “normal” incidence of certain tumor types.
Probably, these animals have not only been already initiated
(cellular genome has been altered), but they contain oncogenes
or proto-oncogenes that only require a promoting agent.
This would mean that most of the agents that we have
identified as carcinogenic are actually promoters.

T14.21. Some Oncogenes.

Function of Product

Gene

Growth factors
Receptor/protein
tyrosine kinases

sis, fgf

Protein tyrosine kinases

src, ret

Membrane-associated G
proteins
Cytoplasmic protein
serine kinases
Nuclear transcription
factors
Unknown,
undetermined

met, neu

ras, gip-2

Localization
Extracellular
Extra cell/cell
membrane
Cell membrane/
cytoplasmic
Cell membrane/
cytoplasmic

raf, pim-l

Cytoplasmic

myc, fos, jun

Nuclear

bcl-2, crk

Mitochondrial,
cytoplasmic

Some Tumor Suppressor Genes
GTPase activation
Cell cycle-regulated
nuclear
transcriptional repressor
Cell cycle-regulated
nuclear
transcription factor
Zinc finger 
transcription factor

14.6.6.2. Tumor Suppressors

Are negative regulators of cell growth. Damage to a tumor
suppressor (p53, retinoblastoma gene) can also trigger
malignant transformation.
p53 holds the record for being mutated in the largest
percentage of tumors relative to any other tumor suppressor.
The complexity of suppressor biology should not be underestimated. For example, knocking out the retinoblastoma gene
in a mouse model can cause severe abnormalities and
embryonic death. But the same knockout in another mouse
strain has no effect.
Animals from closed colonies (no new arrivals introduced into
the strain) obtained from brother-sister matings over 20 or

Mismatch DNA repair
Zinc finger transcription
factor (?)

 

NF1

Cell membrane/
cytoplasmic

RB-l

Nuclear

p53

Nuclear

WTl

Nuclear

hMLHl

Nuclear

BRCA1

Unknown

Zinc fingers are protein, stabilized with a zinc atom, that can bind to
DNA, regulating gene activity.

14-18

more generations become vulnerable to non-pathogenic
viruses, setting up these strains with a higher-than-normal
incidence of certain tumors (mouse lymphoma, rat mammary
tumor). Cervical cancer can be induced in humans by the
Human Papilloma Virus, although the induction takes a long
time.
Humans also harbor proto-oncogenes1. This suggests that some
humans are already primed for cancer and are only waiting for
the proper agent. This would explain ethnic and regional
differences in both incidence rate and type of tumor.

T14.22. Telomeres (light green)
and centromeres (red) on human
chromosomes (blue).

Consequently, aging is not an
inevitable feature of all tissues
or organisms. For example,
planaria worms are practically
immortal.
Aging cells in the worm are
constantly replaced using
pluripotent stem cells9.

14.6.6.3. Telomeres

The shortening of the chromosomes’ telomeres at each cell
division ultimately prevent the cells from dividing and is
believed to contribute to tissue aging, but in humans it is also
observed that telomere shortening usually precedes and
contributes to cancer of the prostate and pancreas. This occurs
presumably when old cells are not destroyed by apoptosis.
The erosion of telomeres might drive a genetic instability (the
ends of chromosomes become “sticky”) required for cells to
become malignant6. In many tissues that need sustained
division (blood, intestinal tissues), the enzyme telomerase
maintains telomere length. In cancerous tissues, telomerase
often keeps telomeres from shrinking (anti-telomerase drugs,
like GRN163L, are being developed to fight cancer).
Cell loss as a result of apoptosis may be compensated by stem
cells within a tissue.

14.6.7. Cell Proliferation
It is believed that chemicals able to increase cell proliferation
in normal cells (T14.25) constitute a cancer risk, because,
among other reasons, the genetic material is more vulnerable
while cells are dividing (T14.23). For example, cell
proliferation is a very powerful predictor of epigenetic bladder
cancer.
Non-genotoxic mechanisms producing cancer are diverse, but
many act on cell proliferation (T14.24). Many epigenetic
cancer induction studies use cell proliferation or apoptosis as
central variables (T14.27). Definite evidence for the effect of
proliferation on cancer is available for a certain number of
substances (T14.28).
A trauma such as a cut has been identified as a required
element in initiating Kaposi’s sarcoma, a common cancer in
AIDS patients3. Because of this promotion and progression
physiology, tests that measure increased cell proliferation are
important in carcinogenicity determinations in vitro (T14.27).
Even extracellular medium composition may have an effect on
cancer expression.



In virus-induced cancers, chromosomes continue to mutate after infection,
evolving into numerous chromosomal rearrangements.
1
A normal gene which, when altered by mutation, becomes an oncogene that can
contribute to cancer.

14-19

T14.23. Why Mitogenesis is Mutagenic.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Shortened cell interphase, leaving less time for cell repair.
Dividing DNA is less stable, as separated from histones.
Mitosis is a dangerous event (delicate mitotic apparatus).
Rise in the mutated population of cells.

T14.26. Non-genotoxic carcinogens increasing
the labeling index in vivo.

Compound
Wy-14643
(shown at left 2)
Unleaded
Gasoline
Furans
(F8.21)

T14.24. Actions on Non-Genotoxic Carcinogens.
1.
2.
3.
4.

action on cellular receptor or growth factor
action on a hormonal receptor
action on organ size
mitosis for replacement of dead cells at relatively low
concentration
5. sustained cytotoxicity-coordinated hyperplasia with
subsequent regenerative growth
6. interruption of cell-cell communication
7. inhibition of apoptosis
8. inflammation
9. simple tissue destruction
10. cell proliferation together with oxidative damage

T14.27. Tests based on Increased Cell Proliferation.

Benzoyl peroxide

11. biological stimulation of proliferation

TPA
T14.25. Chemicals that Produce Hyperplasia in Humans.

Agent

Target Tissue

Reference

Arsenicals
Anthralin
Halogenated
hydrocarbons
(dioxin)

Epidermis
Epidermis

U.S. EPA (1984)
Bock (1963)
Moses (1985)
cutaneous study in
workers
Ura (1989)
Klein-Szanto
(1989)

Epidermis

Formaldehyde

Respiratory
epithelium

Tobacco

Respiratory
epithelium

Auerbach (1961)

Phenatecin

Urothelium

Schmahl (1977)
Iatrogenic

Hydantoin

Gingiva-Lymphoid
Tissues

Schmahl (1977)

Proliferative Increase
x 10
male rat liver
x5
female mouse liver
x 10
male rat liver

TPA

InvasivenessProliferation/
Rodent epidermal
carcinoma
InvasivenessProliferation/Human
immortalized
epithelium
InvasivenessProliferation/Human
bronchial epithelium
BEAS-2B

Bonfil (1989)

Aufferman (1985)

Bonfil (1989)

The first stage of cancer, hyperplasia, is induced by a variety of
carcinogens (T14.25), and some non-genotoxic carcinogens are
notorious for producing large increases in the labeling index in
vivo (T14.26).

2

Wy-14643 is a peroxisome proliferation activator, a controversial toxicity
indicator.

14-20

14.7. Testing for Cancer
Animal carcinogenicity is usually determined in 2-year rodent
(rats, mice) studies costing 1 million $ or more. These are
labor-intensive, requiring a minimum of 50 animals of each sex
per dosage level, with extensive morphological examination
and identification of tumor types (benign, malignant). The
results hopefully produce a dose-effect relationship for
determination of a Safe Human Dose.

T14.28. Proliferation Agents associated
with Human Cancers.
modified from Preston-Martin et al

Agent of Cell Proliferation
Hormones
Estrogen
Estrogen and progesterone
Ovulation
Testosterone
Drugs
Oral contraceptives
Anabolic steroids
Infectious agents (through cell destruction)
Hepatitis B virus, genotype C (hepadnavirus)
Schistosoma hematobium
Schistosoma japonicum
Clonorchis siniensis
Opisthorchis viverrini
Tuberculosis
Epstein-Barr virus
Chemical agents
Tobacco
Salt
Bile and pancreatic juice
Betel nut, lime
Physical or mechanical trauma
Asbestos
Chronic impulse noise
Other chronic irritations
Tropical ulcers

Cancer Site
Endometrium
Breast
Ovary

Prostate

Animal models of carcinogenicity do not always seem to
extrapolate to humans, as inspection of T14.29 will show. It is
difficult to know whether an absence of correlation between
human cancer incidence and animals models is due to
misleading epidemiological data or to inappropriate animal
models. A good case in point is the animal carcinogenicity
models for arsenic, which show no effect, while human studies
do.
In spite of this, cancer bioassays in animals have long been
recognized and accepted since the 1960s and early 1970s as
valid predictors of human cancer hazards. The tests expose
animals from several weeks after birth to 2 years.
The sensitivity of carcinogenesis bioassays may be improved
by exposing rodents earlier in utero, and continuing for 2.5
years or even until natural death of the animals (about 3
years)11.

Liver

Liver
Liver
Bladder
Colon
Biliary tract
Biliary tract
Lung
Burkitt’s lymphoma,
AIDS
Oral cavity, lung, pharynx
Stomach
Small intestine

Oral cavity

14.8. Toxicity of Cancer Treatments

Mesothelioma

Acoustic neuroma

For the top 12 types of cancer, therapy is still today based on
radiation, chemotherapy and surgery4. Of these, chemotherapy
is the least discriminating, killing dividing cells everywhere in
the body. The only logic is that cells dividing frequently should
suffer the most, and this works well in leukemias, but poorly in

Skin.

14-21

Cell proliferation assessment is important in cancer genesis,
but also in the evaluation of the effectiveness of anti-cancer
drugs. Cancer cells (tumors), because of their high proliferation
rate, can be preferentially killed by drugs that are cytotoxic,
but almost all cancer drugs are carcinogenic.

tumors that grow slowly. The hair and lining of the gut are
affected, causing hair loss and diarrhea.

Some tumors such as mesothelioma are very difficult to treat.
So, many different drugs are tried alone in the treatment of
mesothelioma: 5-Fluorouracil, Cisplatin, Cyclophosphamide,
Detorubicin, Doxorubicin, Hypericin, Ifosfamide,
Mechlorethamine, Melphalan, Methotrexate, Mitomycin-C,
Paclitaxel, Procarbazine, m-tetrahydroxyphenylchlorin, Thiotepa, Vinorelbine.
Many drugs are also given in combination. Drugs combined
with Doxorubicin: 5-Azacytidine, Actinomycin-D, Cisplatin,
Cyclophosphamide, Dacarbazine, Razoxane, Vincristine,
Cisplatin Mitomycin-C, Cyclophosphamide Cisplatin,
Cyclophosphamide Vincristine, Dacarbazine
Cyclophosphamide, Dacarbazine Vincristine, Dacarbazine
Vincristine Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine Methotrexate
Folinic-acid, Cyclophosphamide Methotrexate Etoposide
Vincristine, Dacarbazine Vincristine, Cyclophosphamide,
Actinomycin-D.
Progress in molecular biology has brought very little
improvement in cancer treatment. In fact, the rate of
introduction of truly new drugs has slowed.
There is a line of thinking among oncologists promoting the
control of tumors, considered more feasible than their
eradication. And there are many remaining mysteries.

T14.29. Carcinogenicity of Metals in Humans and Animal Models.

Immune strategies for treating cancer use antibodies binding
to antigens expressed specifically by cancer cells.
Vascular strategies attempt to curb the tumor's blood supply.
Oncological hyperthermia takes advantage of a tumor's
increased susceptibility to heat, while radiation therapy
further damages cancer cells.

Taxol (Paclitaxel), which kills cancer cells by destabilizing
cytoskeletal microtubules and inhibiting cell division should
work against many more tumors than it does. Methotrexate and
14-22.

5-Fluorouracil should also be more effective. Why are the
vinca alkaloids (Vinblastine, Vincristine, Vindesine)
ineffective against breast cancer, while effective against
leukemia and lymphoma?

Beryllium and Beryllium Compounds
1,3-Butadiene
1,4-Butanediol Dimethylsulfonate (Myleran®)
Cadmium and Cadmium Compounds
Chlorambucil
1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-(4-methylcyclohexyl)-1-nitrosourea (MeCCNU)
bis(Chloromethyl) Ether and Technical-Grade Chloromethyl Methyl Ether
Chromium Hexavalent Compounds
Coal Tar Pitches (See Coal Tars and Coal Tar Pitches)
Coal Tars (See Coal Tars and Coal Tar Pitches)
Coke Oven Emissions
Cyclophosphamide
Cyclosporin A (Ciclosporin)
Diethylstilbestrol
Dyes Metabolized to Benzidine (See Benzidine and Dyes Metabolized to Benzidine)
Environmental Tobacco Smoke (See Tobacco Related Exposures)
Erionite
Estrogens, Steroidal
Ethylene Oxide
Melphalan
Methoxsalen with Ultraviolet A Therapy (PUVA)
Mineral Oils (Untreated and Mildly Treated)
Mustard Gas
2-Naphthylamine
Nickel Compounds (See Metallic Nickel and Nickel Compounds)
Radon
Silica, Crystalline (Respirable Size)
Smokeless Tobacco (See Tobacco Related Exposures)
Solar Radiation (See Ultraviolet Radiation Related Exposures)
Soots
Strong Inorganic Acid Mists Containing Sulfuric Acid
Sunlamps or Sunbeds, Exposure to (See Ultraviolet Radiation Related Exposures)
Tamoxifen
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD); “Dioxin”
Thiotepa
Thorium Dioxide
Tobacco Smoking (See Tobacco Related Exposures)
Vinyl Chloride
Ultraviolet Radiation, Broad Spectrum UV Radiation (See Ultraviolet Radiation
Related Exposures)
Wood Dust.

A deep puzzle is drug resistance and tumor adaptation over
time. Relapses occur because drugs have selected resistant
variants of tumor cells. Without drug resistance, most cancers
would be curable right now. P-glycoprotein causes multi-drug
resistance not only in leukemia, but also in breast, lymphatic,
colon, prostate, renal and liver cancers.
Cancer cells develop the ability to expel a wide variety of
anticancer drugs (from the anti-folate family, for example).
Cancer cells also create "waste baskets" into which anti-cancer
drugs (mitoxantrone, for example) are deposited. These
vesicles enlarge and inflate until the drug concentration is a
thousand times greater than in the surrounding cell culture.
Chemotherapy can also stimulate cancer cells to grow at
certain non-therapeutic concentrations. The common
chemotherapy agent doxorubicin actually encourages the
growth of ovarian cancer stem cells12. The immature cells
make up less than 1 percent of an ovarian cancer, but just a few
left behind after surgery can reestablish a tumor.
14.8.1. NIH List of Carcinogens
http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/roc/toc10.html.

14.8.2. NIH List of Probable Carcinogens

Aflatoxins
Alcoholic Beverage Consumption
4-Aminobiphenyl
Analgesic Mixtures Containing Phenacetin (See Phenacetin and Analgesic Mixtures
Containing Phenacetin)
Arsenic Compounds, Inorganic
Asbestos
Azathioprine
Benzene
Benzidine (See Benzidine and Dyes Metabolized to Benzidine)

Acetaldehyde
2-Acetylaminofluorene
Acrylamide
Acrylonitrile
Adriamycin® (Doxorubicin Hydrochloride)
2-Aminoanthraquinone
o-Aminoazotoluene
1-Amino-2-methylanthraquinone.

14-23

2-Amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline (IQ)
Amitrole
o-Anisidine Hydrochloride
Azacitidine (5-Azacytidine®, 5-AzaC)
Benz[a]anthracene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Benzo[b]fluoranthene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Benzo[j]fluoranthene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Benzo[k]fluoranthene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Benzo[a]pyrene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Benzotrichloride
Bromodichloromethane
2,2-bis-(Bromoethyl)-1,3-propanediol (Technical Grade)
Butylated Hydroxyanisole (BHA)
Carbon Tetrachloride
Ceramic Fibers (Respirable Size)
Chloramphenicol
Chlorendic Acid
Chlorinated Paraffins (C12, 60% Chlorine)
1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea
bis(Chloroethyl) nitrosourea
Chloroform
3-Chloro-2-methylpropene
4-Chloro-o-phenylenediamine
Chloroprene
p-Chloro-o-toluidine and p-Chloro-o-toluidine Hydrochloride (See p-Chloro-o-toluidine
and p-Chloro-o-toluidine Hydrochloride)
Chlorozotocin
C.I. Basic Red 9 Monohydrochloride
Cisplatin
p-Cresidine
Cupferron
Dacarbazine
Danthron (1,8-Dihydroxyanthraquinone)
2,4-Diaminoanisole Sulfate
2,4-Diaminotoluene
Dibenz[a,h]acridine (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Dibenz[a,j]acridine (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
7H-Dibenzo[c,g]carbazole (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Dibenzo[a,e]pyrene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Dibenzo[a,h]pyrene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Dibenzo[a,i]pyrene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
1,2-Dibromoethane (Ethylene Dibromide)
2,3-Dibromo-1-propanol
tris(2,3-Dibromopropyl) Phosphate
1,4-Dichlorobenzene
3,3’-Dichlorobenzidine and 3,3’-Dichlorobenzidine Dihydrochloride (See 3,3’Dichlorobenzidine and 3,3’-Dichlorobenzidine Dihydrochloride)
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)
1,2-Dichloroethane (Ethylene Dichloride)

Dichloromethane (Methylene Chloride)
1,3-Dichloropropene (Technical Grade)
Diepoxybutane
Diesel Exhaust Particulates
Diethyl Sulfate
Diglycidyl Resorcinol Ether
3,3’-Dimethoxybenzidine (See 3,3’-Dimethoxybenzidine and Dyes Metabolized to 3,3’Dimethoxybenzidine)
4-Dimethylaminoazobenzene
3,3’-Dimethylbenzidine (See 3,3’-Dimethylbenzidine and Dyes Metabolized to 3,3’Dimethylbenzidine)
Dimethylcarbamoyl Chloride
1,1-Dimethylhydrazine
Dimethyl Sulfate
Dimethylvinyl Chloride
1,6-Dinitropyrene (See Nitroarenes (selected))
1,8-Dinitropyrene (See Nitroarenes (selected))
1,4-Dioxane
Disperse Blue 1
Dyes Metabolized to 3,3’-Dimethoxybenzidine (See 3,3’-Dimethoxybenzidine and
Dyes Metabolized to 3,3’-Dimethoxybenzidine)
Dyes Metabolized to 3,3’-Dimethylbenzidine (See 3,3’-Dimethylbenzidine and
Dyes Metabolized to 3,3’-Dimethylbenzidine)
Epichlorohydrin
Ethylene Thiourea
di(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate
Ethyl Methanesulfonate
Formaldehyde (Gas)
Furan
Glasswool (Respirable Size)
Glycidol
Hexachlorobenzene
Hexachlorocyclohexane Isomoers
Hexachloroethane
Hexamethylphosphoramide
Hydrazine and Hydrazine Sulfate (See Hydrazine and Hydrazine Sulfate)
Hydrazobenzene
Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
Iron Dextran Complex
Isoprene
Kepone® (Chlordecone)
Lead Acetate (See Lead Acetate and Lead Phosphate)
Lead Phosphate (See Lead Acetate and Lead Phosphate)
Lindane and Other Hexachlorocyclohexane Isomers
2-Methylaziridine (Propylenimine)
5-Methylchrysene (See Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons)
4,4’-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)
4-4’-Methylenebis(N,N-dimethyl)benzenamine
4,4’-Methylenedianiline and 4,4’-Methylenedianiline Dihydrochloride (See 4,4’Methylenedianiline and its Dihydrochloride Salt)
Methyleugenol
Methyl Methanesulfonate.

14-24

N-Methyl-N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine
Metronidazole
Michler’s Ketone [4,4’-(Dimethylamino)benzophenone]
Mirex
Nickel (Metallic) (See Nickel and Nickel Compounds)
Nitrilotriacetic Acid
o-Nitroanisole
6-Nitrochrysene (See Nitroarenes (selected))
Nitrofen (2,4-Dichlorophenyl-p-nitrophenyl ether)
Nitrogen Mustard Hydrochloride
2-Nitropropane
1-Nitropyrene (See Nitroarenes (selected))
4-Nitropyrene (See Nitroarenes (selected))
N-Nitrosodi-n-butylamine
N-Nitrosodiethanolamine
N-Nitrosodiethylamine
N-Nitrosodimethylamine
N-Nitrosodi-n-propylamine
N-Nitroso-N-ethylurea
4-(N-Nitrosomethylamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
N-Nitroso-N-methylurea
N-Nitrosomethylvinylamine
N-Nitrosomorpholine
N-Nitrosonornicotine
N-Nitrosopiperidine
N-Nitrosopyrrolidine
N-Nitrososarcosine
Norethisterone
Ochratoxin A
4,4’-Oxydianiline
Oxymetholone
Phenacetin (See Phenacetin and Analgesic Mixtures Containing Phenacetin)
Phenazopyridine Hydrochloride
Phenolphthalein
Phenoxybenzamine Hydrochloride
Phenytoin
Polybrominated Biphenyls (PBBs)
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs)
Procarbazine Hydrochloride
Progesterone
1,3-Propane Sultone
-Propiolactone
Propylene Oxide
Propylthiouracil
Reserpine
Safrole
Selenium Sulfide
Streptozotocin
Styrene-7,8-oxide
Sulfallate
Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroethylene)

Tetrafluoroethylene
Tetranitromethane
Thioacetamide
Thiourea
Toluene Diisocyanate
o-Toluidine and o-Toluidine Hydrochloride(See o-Toluidine and o-Toluidine
Hydrochloride)
Toxaphene
Trichloroethylene
2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
1,2,3-Trichloropropane
Ultraviolet A Radiation (See Ultraviolet Radiation Related Exposure)
Ultraviolet B Radiation (See Ultraviolet Radiation Related Exposure)
Ultraviolet C Radiation (See Ultraviolet Radiation Related Exposure)
Urethane
Vinyl Bromide
4-Vinyl-1-cyclohexene Diepoxide
Vinyl Fluoride.

14.9. Case Study:
Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin
Contamination
(modified from Williams & Burson)
The child, a girl, had a bleeding bladder (hemorrhagic cystitis). She lived near a
riding arena where a number of horses had become ill; some had, in fact, died. The
physicians felt that her illness might somehow be related to the illness in the
animals. At first an infectious disease, perhaps a viral infection, was considered.
An epidemiologist surveyed the riding arena. He collected soil samples and
examined some of the sick horses. The epidemiologist was told that after the riding
arena had been sprayed for dust control, birds and insects near the arena began to
die. Perhaps something had been volatilized from the soil that was killing these
animals; this might also have affected the little girl.
Because of this possibility, the chemists in the laboratory started looking for volatile
substances, but were unable to come up with anything. Indeed, the search did not
produce results until two years later, when one of the chemists, while trying to distill
chemicals from the soil, obtained crystals that condensed on a cold finger of his
distillation apparatus. He identified the crystals as 2,4,5-trichlorophenol. The
chemist concluded that the illness of the girl might have been caused by 2,4,5trichlorophenol.
However, 2,4,5-trichlorophenol is not extremely toxic; on the other hand, it is
known that 2,4,5-trichlorophenol can be contaminated with an extremely toxic
substance, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), which is accidentally
manufactured during production of 2,4,5-trichiorophenol. It was therefore decided to

14-25

perform rabbit ear tests in order to establish whether the soil was also contaminated
with TCDD; possibly TCDD might account for the illness.
The rabbit ear tests were done with an extract from the soil. Some of the rabbits died
within a week and all rabbits developed hyperkeratosis on their ears, a typical
reaction to TCDD. It could therefore be established that TCDD was most likely
present, and additional chemical analysis confirmed this. A reinvestigation of the
case was begun.
By now, three years had elapsed; the riding arena had been excavated twice and
topsoil had been removed, because the soil caused continual problems. The removed
soil had been used as fill beneath a road, in a back yard, and in various other
locations.
Not only one riding arena had been affected, but three. One of the riding arenas
stabled 125 horses, of which 65 had eventually died. Other animals also died. All
horses exposed repeatedly to the contaminated arena surfaces suffered severe weight
loss before they died. Investigation also revealed that not very many people had
been consistently exposed to the soil of the riding arenas. Primarily. children showed
most of the effects probably because they played in the soil and had more
opportunities for contact with it.
Symptoms in the index patient -the six-year-old girl who had been hospitalizedwere hemorrhagic cystitis, headaches, and diarrhea. A ten-year-old girl had
nosebleeding and headaches. People exposed to TCDD often complain of joint pains
and pleuritic pains. Also, skin lesions were noticed. We assumed that the other
children affected-two three-year-old boys-at one point had chloracne, which had
subsided by the time the CDC reinvestigated the case.
The next question we attempted to answer in the investigation was where the TCDD
came from and how it got onto the riding arena surface. We learned of an oil dealer
who collected used oil and then sold it to refineries to be recycled. He had been
hired to spray the riding arenas with oil for dust control, which is a customary
procedure. We wondered if somehow he had picked up the material from a firm that
made 2,4,5-trichlorophenol, the starting material for (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxy)acetic
acid (known simply as 2,4,5-T) and for hexachlorophene.
The oil dealer had a very poor memory about where he collected the TCDD. What
we then had to do was to find a company that was making either 2,4,5-T or 2,4,5trichiorophenol. During the Vietnam War a number of factories produced 2,4,5-T as
an ingredient for Agent Orange. Agent Orange was a mixture of 2,4,5-T and 2,4,-D
used as a defoliant in Vietnam. Therefore we contacted the Department of Defense
and asked them to review their records of all producers of 2,4,5-T. They identified a
company located in the area of interest to us. This particular company had stopped
its production of 2,4,5-T in 1969, before the contamination at the riding arenas had
occurred. It had, however, subleased part of its facility to another company, which
had made 2,4,5-trichlorophenol for the production of hexachlorophene. It was the
second company that had produced the waste material. When 2,4,5-trichlorophenol
is made, TCDD forms as a contaminant. When the company's factory was visited, a
tank was found on the premises that was still partially filled with waste material
containing TCDD.

The company's operators explained that at first they had sent the TCDD containing
waste material to a chemical disposal company; this had been expensive, and they
later subcontracted disposal to the oil dealer we had interviewed earlier. The oil
dealer had indeed mixed the waste with salvaged oil, and had sprayed the riding
arenas with this mixture for dust control.
One of the oil dealer's drivers admitted, on questioning, that while hauling oil on one
occasion, he found his truck was overloaded when he passed through a weighing
station. Before reaching the next weighing station, he unloaded some of the excess
material at a farm owned by the oil dealer. Chickens on that farm subsequently died.
We later took samples on the farm and were able to find TCDD in soil there.
After establishing these facts, CDC personnel visited the other riding arenas and
other locations and took samples for TCDD analysis. It was established that the
other arenas were similarly contaminated. The oil dealer had several times picked up
material from the plant where the TCDD-containing chemical tank was found and
had also collected polychlorinated biphenyls from other companies; these were then
mixed with the TCDD and the oil.
Recently it has been established that contamination by TCDD is much more
extensive than was earlier thought and that the waste-oil dealer sprayed many more

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin

sites with TCDD than those identified in 1974. The contaminated sites at present
number 37; some are rural, others are urban, commercial, or residential. Many sites
have soil levels above 100 µg/kg soil, and in a few areas the concentrations are
above 1 mg/kg soil. The Environmental Protection Agency learned about these sites
from former drivers employed by the waste-oil dealer and from the owner of one of
the riding arenas who followed the trucks to their source. Human health and
environmental studies are continuing in Missouri.
Dioxin is extremely toxic. In animals it causes severe weight loss, affects reproduction, causes liver damage and skin lesions in some species, depresses the cellmediated immunity, and has been shown to be carcinogenic in rodents. Human
illnesses following exposure to TCDD have not been well delineated. Chloracne,
porphyria, cutanea tarda, sensory neuropathy, elevated serum cholesterol, and a
neurasthenic syndrome have been described. Most chemicals that we are familiar
with are toxic in the milligram or gram range. For example, parathion, which is
extremely toxic, has a LD50 in rats of a few milligrams per kilogram body weight,

14-26

but TCDD has an LD50 far lower than that: in rats, the oral LD50 is between 22 and
44 µg/kg. In addition to being acutely very toxic, TCDD also produces chronic toxic
effects at much lower dosage levels. It accumulates in tissues and is persistent. Other
extremely toxic compounds, such as some of the chemical warfare gases, break
down very rapidly and the body is able to excrete them. TCDD is not easily
eliminated from the body.

2-Methyl-Chloroaniline
A literature search concerning 2-methyl-4chloroaniline produced several articles from
Germany and England from the early 1930s. It was reported in these articles that
workers who had worked with this material had developed hematuria. One of the
authors had also studied 2-methyl-4-chloroaniline in cats. It is known that cats
respond more like humans than do other animal species if they are exposed to
anilines and chloroanilines.
At the CDC we performed limited animal experiments by exposing cats to
chlordimeform and 2-methyl-4-chloroaniline, and found that toxic effects could
indeed be caused in the bladder of the cat, though these effects were not as
pronounced as those that had been observed in the workers. Additionally, urine was
collected from the workers to determine whether it contained the 2-methyl-4chloroaniline, and whether chlordimeform could be identified.
The pesticide packaging plant was characterized by very poor work practices:
workers were essentially "bathing" in chlordimeform. There were no facilities where
the workers could change clothes or wash. The packaging process was a very dusty
operation; we thought at first that the problem was simply very heavy overexposure
in the packaging plant. But when we examined some farmers who used the material,
we found that they also had red blood cells in their urine, though they did not have
pronounced hematuria, and their symptoms subsided several weeks after they
stopped using this particular pesticide.
Chlordimeform was subsequently taken off the market for a while. At present, the
rules and regulations for using and packaging this material are much more stringent
than they were, so there is no longer as much exposure to it. But marketing of the
material is once again allowed and the pesticide is presently being used in the United
States and other parts of the world.

14.10. Case Study: Industrial Exposure to
Chlordimeform
(modified from Williams & Burson)
This case occurred in Tennessee at a pesticide packaging plant. Apparently a group
of people who were packaging a chemical called chlordimeform developed
hematuria. The state health department in Tennessee was contacted first, and
somebody from that department contacted the CDC.

Chlordimeform
A number of chlorinated aniline-type derivatives are
currently used as pesticides. Many of them have not
been studied very well; we know very little about their health effects, and little
published information exists on animal toxicology data.
The medical problems among the workers were first discovered when they started
going to physicians. Different people went to different physicians and it was not
recognized at first that all workers had an occupational disease in common. It is at
times difficult to recognize occupational illnesses, particularly if they resemble
diseases common in the general population. One patient, for instance, was treated
for gonorrhea, and another worker was treated for inflammation of the bladder.
When three people from the pesticide packaging plant went to the same physician,
however, this physician began to question whether or not the problems his patients
were having might be associated with their work environment.
Questioning revealed that a similar outbreak of illness had occurred at the plant a
year before when chlordimeform was being packaged. The affected workers
displayed a number of symptoms at that time, including increased urinary frequency.
Primarily, they all noticed that their urine was bloody. They also had such symptoms
as skin rash and dizziness.
Limited animal studies had been conducted with chlordimeform, and CDC
personnel reviewed these. There was no information on human exposures or toxic
effects in humans. Dog, rat, and rabbit studies conducted with chlordimeform did
not suggest that this material caused hematuria. However, the animal studies showed
that chlordimeform is metabolized, and one of the compounds it is metabolized to is
2-methyl-4-chloroaniline. Sometimes a metabolite-not the parent compound-will
cause toxic effects by the removal of a side chain.

REFERENCES
1. Angiosarcoma of the liver following vinyl chloride exposure. Block, J.B. J.A.M.A. 229, 53-54, 1974.
2. Oncogenes and oncoproteins in occupational carcinogenesis. Brandt-Rauf, P.W. Scand. J. Work. Environ. Health 18,
Suppl. #1, 27-30, 1992.
3. Development of Kaposi’s sarcoma in a surgical wound. Webster-Cyriaque J, New England Journal of Medicine
346:1207-9, April 18 2002.
4. Twelve major cancers. Scientific American 275:126-132, 1996.
5. The metabolic tune-up: metabolic harmony and disease prevention. Ames, BN. J. Nutrition 133 (Supplement): 1S-5S,
2003.
6. Telomere Length Abnormalities Occur Early in the Initiation of Epithelial Carcinogenesis. Meeker, Alan K., et al,
Clinical Cancer Research, May 15, 2004, Vol. 10, Issue 10.
7. MYC inactivation uncovers pluripotent differentiation and tumour dormancy in hepatocellular cancer. Shachaf CM
et al. Nature 431, 1112 - 1117 (28 October 2004)
8. Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Minn. A.J., et al. Nature 436(July 28):518-524. Abstract available
at http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature03799. 2005.
9. Identification of genes needed for regeneration, stem cell function, and tissue homeostasis by systemic gene
perturbation in planaria. Reddien P. et al. Dev Cell, 8:635-649, 2005.
10. Updated evidence on the proportion of cancer due to obesity (Abstract #3513). Colditz, G. American Association for
Cancer Research, Frontiers in Cancer Prevention Research meeting. Oct. 30-Nov. 2. Baltimore. 2005.
11. The Limits of Two-Year Bioassay Exposure Regimens for Identifying Chemical Carcinogens. James Huff, Michael F.
Jacobson, and Devra Lee Davis. Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume 116, Number 11, November 2008.
12. Human ovarian cancer stem/progenitor cells are stimulated by doxorubicin but inhibited by Mullerian inhibiting
substance. Katia Meirelles et al. PNAS, February 14, 2012, vol. 109, no. 7.

